Title: The Time-Dependent Traveling Salesman Problem with Loose Time Windows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.26360v1

Published Time: Fri, 28 Aug 2026 00:11:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# The Time-Dependent Traveling Salesman Problem with Loose Time Windows 

# Francisco J. Soulignac 

francisco.soulignac@unq.edu.ar 

Universidad Nacional de Quilmes. Departamento de Ciencia y Tecnología. Bernal, Buenos Aires, Argentina. CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires. Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Computación (ICC). Buenos Aires, Argentina. 

Abstract 

The time-dependent traveling salesman problem with time windows (TDTSPTW) generalizes the well-known traveling salesman problem with time windows by accounting the effects of congestion on travel times. In this paper, we develop an exact framework for the TDTSPTW with a makespan objective that extends the range of instances solvable to optimality under loose time windows while remaining effective across all levels of time-window tightness. Our framework relies on a dynamic-programming labeling algorithm and combines column generation, ng-memory augmentation, and exact search, using completion bounds for state-space sparsification, variable fixing, and exact search pruning. Embedded within a branch-and-price method, the framework solves all instances with up to 45 customers in a benchmark comprising more than 10,000 instances, including all instances without time windows with up to 50 customers. 

Keywords: traveling salesman problem, time-dependent travel times, loose time windows, dynamic programming, column generation 

# 1 Introduction 

The Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows (TSPTW) seeks a tour that visits a set of customers within given time windows, assuming fixed travel times. In practice, however, congestion may cause travel times to vary over the planning horizon. The Time-Dependent TSPTW (TDTSPTW), introduced by Malan-draki and Daskin (1992), accounts for this variation by allowing travel times to depend on the departure time. We consider piecewise-linear travel-time functions satisfying the FIFO property, whereby departing later on an arc cannot result in an earlier arrival. Our objective is to minimize tour completion time (makespan) from a fixed departure time of zero. For broader discussions of time-dependent routing, including FIFO and alternative travel-time models and objective functions, see Ichoua et al. (2003); Gendreau et al. (2015); Fontaine (2024); Adamo et al. (2024). Research on the TSPTW began more than forty years ago with the foundational works of Christofides et al. (1981) and Baker (1983). Since then, a large and still evolving body of literature has developed, encompassing exact and heuristic approaches (see Pralet, 2023; Soulignac, 2026, for an updated literature review). The most efficient exact methods currently rely on dynamic programming, also for related objectives such as travel cost and duration minimization. These include anytime informed-search methods (Fontaine et al., 2023; Kuroiwa and Beck, 2023; Soulignac, 2026), decremental state-space relaxation frameworks based on ng-memory (Baldacci et al., 2012; Tilk and Irnich, 2017; Lera-Romero et al., 2022), and general-purpose multivalued decision diagrams, which have achieved competitive results on TSPTW instances with tight time windows (Gillard et al., 2021; Rudich et al., 2023; Coppé et al., 2024; Tardivo et al., 2026). Dynamic 1arXiv:2608.26360v1 [cs.DS] 26 Aug 2026 programming is also used in heuristic approaches, such as the iterated large-neighborhood search of Pralet (2023), which can prove optimality on sufficiently constrained instances. The TDTSPTW has attracted a smaller but steadily growing body of research since its introduction by Malandraki and Daskin (1992). Exact approaches include constraint programming (Melgarejo et al., 2015), branch-and-bound and branch-and-cut (Cordeau et al., 2014; Montero et al., 2017; Arigliano et al., 2018, 2019; Adamo et al., 2020), dynamic discretization discovery (Vu et al., 2020), and dynamic programming (Lera-Romero et al., 2022; Fontaine et al., 2023). The dynamic programming approaches of Fontaine et al. (2023) and Lera-Romero et al. (2022) are currently the most efficient methods for the TDTSPTW, with the former performing particularly well on tightly constrained instances and the latter becoming comparatively more effective as the windows loosen. Together with Soulignac (2026), these approaches define the state of the art for the TSPTW, with Soulignac (2026) being particularly effective on the most tightly constrained instances. The width of the time windows is a key factor in the efficiency of dynamic programming approaches for the TSPTW and its time-dependent variants, and can be more important than the number of customers. Tight time windows restrict the set of feasible tours and thus the search space, whereas looser windows allow substantially larger search spaces. This behavior has been observed in both the TSPTW (Dumas et al., 1995; Soulignac, 2026) and the TDTSPTW (Lera-Romero et al., 2022; Fontaine et al., 2023). Further evidence is provided by Rifki and Solnon (2025), who show that the ratio between time-window width and the planning horizon is a better predictor of computational effort than the number of customers for the exact approach of Fontaine et al. (2023). For the TSPTW, computational evaluations commonly rely exclusively on the benchmark collection main-tained by López-Ibáñez and Blum (2023). Recently, Soulignac (2026) reported that a straightforward exact algorithm solves all classical benchmark instances with 50 or more customers within seconds, yet struggles on newer instances introduced by Fontaine (2024) with fewer than 30 customers and loose time windows. These results suggest that loose time-window regimes are underrepresented in the classical benchmark collection, highlighting the importance of evaluating exact methods across a broad spectrum of temporal constraints. Interestingly, Fontaine (2024) adapts time-dependent instances of Rifki et al. (2020), systematically varying their time-window tightness, following a strategy introduced by Arigliano et al. (2019) for the TDTSPTW. The state-of-the-art comparison above draws on the computational experiments of Fontaine (2024), which evaluate leading exact solvers across these regimes. As time windows become looser, the TDTSPTW gradually approaches the Time-Dependent Traveling Salesman Problem (TDTSP), in which no time-window constraints are imposed. An intermediate case arises when only deadlines are present, with no lower bounds on arrival times and no waiting decisions, yielding a spectrum of temporal restrictions from tightly constrained time windows to time-dependent routing without time windows. Despite substantial progress, the weakly constrained end of this spectrum remains challenging for exact methods: to date, several benchmark instances of the TDTSP with 25 or more customers remain open. In this paper, we study the TDTSPTW and aim to extend the range of weakly constrained instances that can be solved exactly. 

# 1.1 Motivation 

The method of Lera-Romero et al. (2022), originally proposed for the TDTSPTW with duration mini-mization, relies on dynamic programming with ng-relaxations and builds on earlier approaches for related TSPTW variants (see Baldacci et al., 2012; Tilk and Irnich, 2017). It follows a multi-phase framework based on a common optimization problem: a σ-TDTSPTW in which visiting vertex v yields a benefit σv , and tours are evaluated through a reduced-cost criterion combining travel times and vertex benefits. Its phases solve progressively stronger relaxations characterized by a vertex-based ng-memory structure defining path feasibility. The first phase computes σ as the optimal dual solution of the final restricted master problem obtained through column generation. Each pricing problem is a σ-TDTSPTW with a small ng-memory structure, solved by forward labeling to identify negative reduced-cost tours. The second phase iteratively enlarges 2the ng-memories to forbid cycles detected in minimum reduced-cost tours. The dual vector σ is kept fixed throughout this phase, and the resulting sequence of strengthened σ-TDTSPTWs is solved through bidirec-tional labeling. Since stronger ng-memory structures reduce dominance opportunities, these pricing problems become progressively harder to solve despite using the same labeling machinery. Finally, the third phase computes an optimal tour through an exact forward labeling algorithm within a bounding framework. It first generates feasible backward paths by solving a relaxed σ-TDTSPTW using σ and the final ng-memory structure, and then performs a best-first forward search guided by compatible backward completions. While improving upon previous solvers for the TDTSPTW, this framework exhibits several limitations that become particularly relevant for instances with loose time windows. First, the pricing problems required to compute σ in the initial phase are computationally demanding even with relatively small ng-memory struc-tures. Since column generation is performed under a fixed time budget (one third of the total computation time), σ may be obtained before convergence, potentially limiting its effectiveness in guiding subsequent phases. Moreover, reusing σ across phases restricts the ability of the method to adapt the reduced-cost information to stronger ng-memory structures, since subsequent decisions remain based on the initial re-laxation. Finally, iterative ng-memory enlargement may require substantial computational effort without proportional gains in pruning efficiency. This limitation becomes more pronounced for loose time windows, where many alternative cycles with comparable costs may remain available after individual cycles are forbid-den. The sequential organization of the framework, with predefined phases and fixed time budgets, further limits the integration of search strategies such as branch-and-bound. 

# 1.2 Our contributions 

This paper develops an exact solution framework for the TDTSPTW that extends the range of instances solvable to optimality under loose time windows while remaining effective across different levels of time-window tightness. Motivated by the limitations of the method of Lera-Romero et al. (2022), we redesign the interaction among column generation, ng-memory augmentation, and exact search, allowing information generated by each component to guide the others instead of treating them as independent sequential stages. Rather than applying these procedures once, we embed them into an iterative framework. In each iteration, a dual vector σ is obtained through column generation using the current ng-memory structure. The ng-memories are then augmented to forbid cycles appearing in tours obtained by solving progressively stronger σ-TDTSPTWs. Finally, an exact search, guided by completion bounds derived from σ and the current ng-memory structure, is executed for a limited time budget. If optimality is not proven, the process continues with the strengthened structure, enabling σ and ng-memories to co-evolve. As in the framework of Lera-Romero et al. (2022), a key challenge is solving the σ-TDTSPTW instances in the initial column generation phase. Under loose time windows, labeling methods explore a large state space even with small ng-memories. To address this issue, we embed a completion-bound-driven sparsifica-tion mechanism within column generation. After solving a σ-TDTSPTW instance via forward labeling, a backward labeling may temporarily remove arcs with poor completion bounds based on σ. These reductions decrease the effective network size and accelerate subsequent pricing problems. The mechanism is used both in heuristic pricing, to quickly generate a rich set of columns, and in exact pricing, where it provides an exact variable-fixing procedure that eliminates arcs that cannot belong to an optimal tour. Additionally, the incumbent solution is continuously improved through a primal heuristic, producing tighter completion bounds that enhance sparsification and variable fixing. The proposed framework further exploits time dependency through an arc-position ng-memory structure, where the additional ng-memory required to forbid a cycle depends on its arcs and position within a tour. This reflects the fact that the cost of traversing a cycle varies with departure time, with position serving as a proxy. Consequently, ng-memory structures can be refined more selectively, allowing more cycles to be processed before reaching a prohibitive combinatorial explosion. Extensive computational experiments demonstrate that our approach significantly extends the capabilities of existing exact methods. It solves all benchmark instances considered in Lera-Romero et al. (2022) and Fontaine (2024) with up to 45 customers, whereas the method of Lera-Romero et al. (2022) fails to solve 3some instances without time windows with only 20 customers. These results establish a new state of the art for the exact solution of the TDTSPTW in regimes with loose or absent time-window constraints. 

# 2 Problem Formulation and Solution Framework 

This section introduces the notation and optimization problems underlying the proposed framework. We first define the TDTSPTW and its ng-relaxation, then present the master problem (MP) used to obtain dual information and certify optimality. Finally, we introduce the σ-TDTSPTW, the pricing problem solved throughout the framework, and conclude with an overview of the algorithm. 

# 2.1 Problem Statement 

Throughout this article, we write [ j] = [0 , j ], [[ i, j ]] = [ i, j ] ∩ N, and [[ j]] = [[0 , j ]] for i, j ∈ R. Consider a 

transport network D represented by a complete digraph with vertex set [[ n + 1]], where vertices 0 and n + 1 denote the start and end depots , and vertices in [[1 , n ]] denote customers . A (forward) path r is a nonempty vertex sequence r = ⟨v0, . . . , v k⟩ with v0 = 0. A path is elementary if it contains no repeated vertices, and a 

tour if k = vk = n + 1; thus, an elementary tour visits each customer exactly once. A vehicle operates in D within a planning horizon T ∈ R. Each arc vw has a piecewise-linear travel time 

function τ (vw, t ) with domain [ T ], representing the traversal time when departing from v at time t. These functions satisfy the FIFO property , namely, t′ + τ (vw, t + t′) ≥ τ (vw, t ) for t′ ∈ [T − t]. 

Remark 1. Under the adopted definition of τ , time windows can be incorporated into travel time functions. Specifically, for a TDTSPTW instance with window [a(v), b (v)] at customer v, each incoming arc vw can be modified to delay arrivals before a(w) by setting τ (vw, t ) = a(w) − t whenever t + τ (vw, t ) < a (w), and to make arrivals after b(w) infeasible by setting τ (vw, t ) = T − t + 1 whenever t + τ (vw, t ) > b (w). Thus, any TDTSPTW instance can be viewed as a TDTSP instance, and conversely by assigning [T ] as the time window of every customer. Nevertheless, we explicitly model time windows in the arc-position states below, as they provide a compact representation of temporal restrictions and a natural characterization of benchmark instances according to window tightness. 

In the proposed framework, time windows and ng-memories are associated with arc-position states rather than vertices. Thus, for v, w ∈ [[ n + 1]] and p ∈ [[ n]], each pair ( vw, p ) is associated with a (possibly empty) 

time window [a(vw, p ), b (vw, p )] ⊆ [T ] and an ng-memory M (vw, p ) ⊆ [[ n + 1]]. The time window imposes that traversing vw at position p starts no earlier than a(vw, p ) and is completed no later than b(vw, p ). The ng-memory requires every cycle in a path r = ⟨v0, . . . , v k⟩ to contain an arc-position state whose memory excludes the repeated vertex. Formally, r is M -feasible if, for every i, j ∈ [[ k]] with i < j and vi = vj , there exists p ∈ [[ i, j − 1]] such that vi /∈ M (vpvp+1 , p ). Note that every elementary tour is M -feasible. For p ∈ [[ k]], the earliest arrival time at vp along a path r = ⟨v0, . . . , v k⟩ is recursively defined as 

δ(r, p ) = 

{

0 if p = 0 ,δ(r, p − 1) + τ (vp−1vp, max {δ(r, p − 1) , a (vp−1vp, p − 1) }) otherwise, (1) where the maximum term accounts for waiting times. Path r is ng-feasible if it is M -feasible and satisfies 

δ(r, p ) ≤ b(vp−1vp, p − 1) for all p ∈ [[1 , k ]]. We define δ(r) = δ(r, k ) if r is ng-feasible and δ(r) = T + 1 otherwise, referring to δ(r) as the makespan of r.The TDTSPTW is the problem of finding an ng-feasible elementary tour of minimum makespan in transport network D. The ng-memory structure is not part of the optimization problem itself, but defines ng-relaxations of the elementary tour constraint exploited throughout our framework. 

# 2.2 Certification of Optimality 

Suppose that an elementary tour r∗ is available. Our framework repeatedly seeks to certify that r∗ is optimal by considering the set Ω( D, r ∗) of ng-feasible tours in D with makespan strictly smaller than δ(r∗). If no 4affine combination of tours in this set covers all customers, then no improving elementary tour exists, and 

r∗ is optimal. This motivates the following linear program, where αvr denotes the number of visits to vertex 

v by tour r ∈ Ω( D, r ∗), and yr denotes its coefficient in the affine combination. MP( D, r ∗) : min ∑

> r∈Ω( D,r ∗)

δ(r)yr (2) s.t. ∑

> r∈Ω( D,r ∗)

yr ≤ 1 (3) 

∑

> r∈Ω( D,r ∗)

αvr yr ≥ 1 for every v ∈ [[1 , n ]] (4) 

yr ∈ [0 , 1] for every r ∈ Ω( D, r ∗). (5) The objective function (2) minimizes the weighted makespan of an affine combination of tours in Ω( D, r ∗). Constraints (3) and (5) define the affine combination, while constraints (4) ensure that every customer is covered at least once. Unlike classical set-partitioning formulations, Ω( D, r ∗) depends on the incumbent solution and includes only tours improving r∗. Therefore, MP( D, r ∗) may be infeasible. In this case, no improving elementary tour exists, and r∗ is optimal for the TDTSPTW. Initially, r∗ is an artificial tour with makespan T + 1. Thus, if no improving tour exists, infeasibility of MP( D, r ∗) certifies that the TDTSPTW on D is infeasible. Herafter, we omit notation arguments that are clear from context; for example, D and r∗ are omitted from Ω and MP whenever unambiguous. 

# 2.3 The σ-TDTSPTW 

All major components of the proposed framework rely on the σ-TDTSPTW , parameterized by a vector of vertex benefits σ ∈ Rn+1 , typically obtained from the dual variables of MP. Given D, r∗, and σ, the problem consists of finding a tour r ∈ Ω minimizing 

δ(D, σ, r ) = δ(r) − ∑

> v∈[[ n+1]]

αvr σv .

When σ is dual feasible for a restricted MP, δ equals the reduced cost of r. Hence, we refer to σ as a dual vector and to δ as the reduced cost , even if σ is not dual feasible. Each dual vector σ provides a lower bound on the makespan of any elementary tour q ∈ Ω, since 

lb (D, r ∗, σ ) = min {δ(r) | r ∈ Ω} + Σ ≤ δ(q) + Σ = δ(q),

where Σ = ∑ 

> v∈[[ n+1]]

σv . If lb ≥ δ(r∗), then r∗ is optimal. We refer to lb as the σ-bound of ( D, r ∗). 

# 2.4 Overview of the framework 

Algorithm 1 provides an overview of the proposed framework. Starting from an initial incumbent tour, each iteration attempts to certify its optimality by strengthening MP through four complementary mechanisms: increasing the σ-bound, improving the incumbent solution, reducing the transport network, and augmenting the ng-memory structure. These mechanisms interact with the exact search procedure and reinforce one another until the incumbent tour is certified optimal. A stronger dual vector σ provides tighter completion bounds, benefiting all procedures that rely on these bounds, including sparsification, variable fixing, exact search, and ng-memory augmentation. In particular, greater σ-bounds enable variable fixing to forbid additional arc-position combinations from the network, re-ducing the search space and simplifying subsequent σ-TDTSPTW instances. Conversely, greater σ-bounds are obtained by removing tours from MP via ng-memory augmentation, enlarging the search space of subse-quent σ-TDTSPTW instances. Algorithm 1 balances these effects, alternating between the four mechanisms. 5Algorithm 1 Solver (high-level description) 

Input: a complete transport network D

Output: an optimal elementary tour r∗ in D, or an artificial one if D has no elementary tours  

> 1:

let lb = 0, and let r∗ be an artificial elementary tour with δ(r∗) = T + 1  

> 2:

while lb < δ (r∗): 

> 3:

Increase the σ-bound: invoke the CG method (Section 4) to obtain a solution of MP with support 

R, whose corresponding dual solution σ yields a strong σ-bound lb  

> 4:

Improve incumbent: execute the primal heuristic (Appendix A) on selected columns of the re-stricted MP obtained in Step 3 to update r∗. 

> 5:

Reduce the network: run the variable fixing method (Section 3.2.1) to remove from D the arc-position combinations that cannot belong to any elementary tour r satisfying δ(r) < δ (r∗).  

> 6:

Augment ng-memories: update ng-memories to first forbid cycles on each tour of R, and then on the best tours obtained from repeated solutions of the σ-TDTSPTW (Section 5)  

> 7:

Exact search: try to find the optimal solution r∗ by performing an exact search over the elementary tours in D, taking advantage of the paths of Step 6 to compute completion bounds. The framework does not apply variable fixing during early iterations of the initial column generation process because the exact completion bounds provide limited pruning at this stage. Consequently, variable fixing would require substantial computational effort to remove only a few arc-position combinations from the network. Even with heuristic labeling relying on strengthened dominance rules, solving pricing problems on the complete network is computationally demanding. To mitigate this issue, we embed a sparsification mechanism that applies the completion-bound principle underlying variable fixing within a heuristic scheme. Heuristic completion bounds derived from the non-dominated paths of the previous pricing iteration are used to remove non-promising arc-position combinations from the network. Sparsification may discard arc-position combinations that belong to every optimal tour; in such cases, the full transport network is eventually restored and sparsification is reapplied if appropriate. Overall, fewer pricing problems are solved on the complete network. Early-stage sparsification is complemented by the primal heuristic to tighten completion bounds. Their combination accelerates the transition from the initial exploratory phase to a state where variable fixing becomes effective, making the first iteration of Algorithm 1 computationally viable. 

# 3 Solving a σ-TDTSPTW 

To solve σ-TDTSPTWs, we implement a labeling algorithm that implicitly explores a tree of paths F(D, r ∗). Since the algorithm follows a standard labeling framework, we describe only the components specific to our implementation and required for reproducibility. The root of F is the path ⟨0⟩ containing only the start depot, and its leaves correspond to the tours in Ω. A node at depth p ≤ n represents a path r = ⟨v0, . . . , v p⟩, whose children are the ng-feasible extensions 

r + ⟨v⟩ for v ∈ [[ n + 1]]. Each node is represented by a forward label ℓ requiring O(1) words of memory. The label stores a pointer last( ℓ) to its parent, the position p(ℓ) = p, the last vertex v(ℓ) = vp, the makespan 

δ(ℓ) = δ(r), the profit σ(ℓ) = ∑pi=0 σvi , and the memory M (ℓ) = {v ∈ [[ n + 1]] | r + ⟨v⟩ is not ng-feasible },implemented as a bitset. Unless otherwise stated, nodes, labels, and the paths they represent are used interchangeably. For w ∈ [[ n+1]], the path r +⟨w⟩ is a child of r if w / ∈ M (ℓ), δ(r +⟨w⟩) ≤ b(vpw, p ), and δ(r +⟨w⟩) < δ (r∗). The corresponding label ℓ′ is obtained from ℓ by setting last( ℓ′) = ℓ, p(ℓ′) = p+1, v(ℓ′) = w, σ(ℓ′) = σ(ℓ)+ σw,

δ(ℓ′) = δ(ℓ) + τ (vpw, max {δ(ℓ), a (vpw, p )}), and M (ℓ′) = ( M (ℓ) ∪ { vp}) ∩ M (vpw, p ). Travel times are evaluated in O(1) time using an arc-specific lookup table that identifies the relevant piecewise-linear segments of each travel-time function. Consequently, each label extension can be performed in O(1) time. Dominance rules are used to prune nodes without affecting optimality. For paths r and r′ ending at the 6same position, r dominates r′ if, for every r′ + q ∈ Ω, we have r + q ∈ Ω and δ(r + q) ≤ δ(r′ + q). We apply the following rule to efficiently identify dominated labels. 

Rule 1. If p(ℓ) = p(ℓ′), v(ℓ) = v(ℓ′), δ(ℓ) ≤ δ(ℓ′), σ(ℓ) ≥ σ(ℓ′), and M (ℓ) ⊆ M (ℓ′), then ℓ dominates ℓ′.

The (forward) labeling algorithm explores F using breadth-first search. Dominance is not applied to labels reaching the end depot, allowing the generation of additional tours. These tours enrich the column set of MP, accelerating column generation convergence, and are used to enlarge the ng-memories. 

Heuristic labeling. We implement two heuristic variants of the labeling algorithm to accelerate early column generation. The relax-all variant removes the arrival-time and memory-inclusion conditions from Rule 1, retaining only profit comparison, whereas relax-ng removes only the memory-inclusion condition. For convenience, we use (2.3), retaining the notation lb , to estimate a lower bound for the TDTSPTW. This estimate is not guaranteed to be a valid lower bound. Relax-ng may remain computationally demanding because its dominance rule still depends on a trade-off between arrival time and profit. The continuous nature of σ makes this relation sensitive to small variations in dual values. This effect occurs for all time-window widths but is amplified for loose time windows, where fewer labels are eliminated by temporal infeasibility. 

# 3.1 Backward labeling 

In this section, we present a backward labeling algorithm analogous to the forward procedure, describing only the differences. Since solving the TDTSPTW by backward labeling requires an additional state variable to account for the possible arrival times at the end depot (Lera-Romero et al., 2022), we instead fix the target arrival time to the incumbent makespan δ(r∗). This avoids the larger state space while providing all the information required for variable fixing, sparsification, and ng-memory augmentation. For each arc vw , let the backward travel-time function τ b(vw, t ) denote the travel time corresponding to the latest departure that reaches w by time t ∈ [T ]. Formally, τ b(vw, t ) = t−max {t′ ∈ [T ] | t′ +τ (vw, t ′) ≤ t}.A backward path is a nonempty suffix r = ⟨vn+1 −k, . . . , v n+1 ⟩ of a tour. Elementarity and M -feasibility are defined analogously to the forward setting, and we omit the qualifier backward whenever the context is clear. Let δb(r, p ) denote the latest departure time from vp that allows the remaining suffix of r to reach the end depot no later than δ(r∗). It is computed recursively as follows: 

δb(r, p ) = 

{

δ(r∗) if p = n + 1 ,δb(r, p + 1) − τ b(vpvp+1 , min {δb(r, p + 1) , b (vpvp+1 , p )}) otherwise. (6) A path r is bng-feasible if it is M -feasible and satisfies δb(r, p ) ≥ a(vpvp+1 , p ) for every p ∈ [[ n + 1 − k, n ]]. We define the departure time of r as δb(r) = δb(r, k ) if r is bng-feasible, and δb(r) = −1 otherwise. The set Ωb(r∗) of bng-feasible tours consists of the tours in Ω and those ng-feasible with makespan equal to δ(r∗). Let B(D, r ∗) denote the tree rooted at ⟨n + 1 ⟩, whose leaves correspond to the tours in Ω b. A node at depth p ≤ n represents a backward path r = ⟨vn+1 −p, . . . , v n+1 ⟩, whose children are the bng-feasible extensions ⟨v⟩ + r for v ∈ [[ n + 1]]. Each node is represented by a backward label ℓ storing a pointer next( ℓ) to its parent, the position p(ℓ) = n + 1 − p, the initial vertex v(ℓ) = vn+1 −p, the departure time δb(ℓ) = δb(r), the profit σ(ℓ) = ∑pi=0 σvn+1 −i , and the memory M (ℓ) = {v ∈ [[ n + 1]] | ⟨ v⟩ + r is not bng-feasible }. Unless otherwise stated, backward nodes, labels, and the paths they represent are used interchangeably. Recall that αvr denotes the number of visits of vertex v in tour r. Let δb(D, σ, r ) = δ(r∗) − δb(r) −∑ 

> v∈[[ n+1]]

αvr σv be the backward reduced cost of r. For backward paths r and r′ at the same position, r

dominates r′ if, for every q + r′ ∈ Ωb, we have q + r ∈ Ωb and δb(q + r) ≤ δb(q + r′)

Rule 2. If p(ℓ) = p(ℓ′), v(ℓ) = v(ℓ′), δb(ℓ) ≥ δb(ℓ′), σ(ℓ) ≥ σ(ℓ′), and M (ℓ) ⊆ M (ℓ′), then ℓ dominates ℓ′.

The backward labeling algorithm explores B without applying dominance to complete tours, allowing the generation of additional tours for ng-memory augmentation. It can also be interpreted as solving a backward 

7σ-TDTSPTW that finds a tour r ∈ Ωb minimizing δb. However, unlike the tour in Ω minimizing δ, r cannot be used to derive a lower bound for the TDTSPTW analogous to lb (2.3). The heuristic variants relax-all and relax-ng are defined analogously to their forward counterparts. 

# 3.2 Bounded labeling 

Bounded labeling is an acceleration technique for solving sequences of σ-TDTSPTW instances over transport networks with progressively smaller Ω sets while keeping σ fixed (Baldacci et al., 2012; Tilk and Irnich, 2017; Lera-Romero et al., 2022). Besides dominance, it prunes labels that cannot be extended into tours satisfying a completion criterion. We adapt it below to the forward and backward labeling algorithms. Let D and D′ be transport networks whose Ω sets are comparable by inclusion, and denote by D− and D+

the networks inducing the smaller and larger sets, respectively. A forward label ℓ ∈ F (D) and a backward label m ∈ B (D′) are compatible if p(ℓ) = p(m), v(ℓ) = v(m), M (ℓ) ∩ M (m) = ∅, and δ(ℓ) ≤ δb(m). The first three conditions ensure that r = ℓ ⊕ m is a bng-feasible tour of D+, where ⊕ concatenates the paths represented by the two labels by merging their common vertex. The last condition guarantees δb(r) ≥ 0 and 

δ(r) ≤ δ(r∗), implying that r ∈ Ωb(D+). Moreover, δ(r) = δ(r∗) can only occur when p(ℓ) < n + 1. The corresponding completion value is 

δcb (ℓ, m ) = [ δ(ℓ) − σ(ℓ)] + [δ(r∗) − δb(m) − σ(m)] + σv(ℓ) − δ(r∗) (7) 

≤ δ(ℓ ⊕ m) − ∑

> v∈[[ n+1]]

αv(ℓ⊕m)σv − δ(r∗) = δ(ℓ ⊕ m) − δ(r∗).

Observation 1. if δcb (ℓ, m ) > 0, then δ(ℓ ⊕ m) > δ (r∗).

If r∗ is not optimal in D−, there exists an elementary tour r ∈ Ω( D−) with δ(r) < δ (r∗) and δb(r) ≤

δb(r∗). Moreover, for every p ∈ [[ n + 1]], r can be decomposed as r = ℓ ⊕ m into compatible labels ℓ ∈ F (D)and m ∈ B (D′) satisfying p(ℓ) = p(m) = p and δcb (ℓ, m ) ≤ 0. Although these labels may be removed by dominance, Rules 1 and 2 imply the following result. 

Proposition 1. Let p ∈ [[ n + 1]] . If r∗ is not optimal in D−, then there exist non-dominated compatible labels ℓ ∈ F (D) and m ∈ B (D′) satisfying p(ℓ) = p(m) = p and δcb (ℓ, m ) ≤ 0.

The completion bound of a forward label ℓ induced by a set of backward labels Lb is cb (ℓ) = min {δcb (ℓ, m ) |

m ∈ L b}. Given Lb, the forward bounded labeling algorithm extends the labeling procedure by discarding the labels with cb > 0. By Proposition 1, when executed on D− with Lb containing all non-dominated labels of B(D+), the algorithm either finds a tour in Ω( D−) with δ < δ (r∗) or certifies the optimality of r∗. Since labels with cb > 0 are discarded, the search is restricted to a subset of the tours computed by the labeling method. Therefore, the resulting lower bound δ(r) + Σ, where r minimizes δ among the explored tours, is never weaker than lb in (2.3). For simplicity, we use the same notation lb for this bound, as the meaning follows from the context. Completion bounds of backward labels and the backward bounded labeling algorithm are defined anal-ogously. The latter obtains a tour r ∈ Ωb(D−) minimizing δb(r). Unlike the forward case, however, δb(r)does not provide a lower bound for the TDTSPTW analogous to lb , as discussed in Section 3.1. An immediate consequence of Proposition 1 is that bounded labeling can be applied iteratively over transport networks with progressively smaller Ω sets. Specifically, let D0, . . . , D k be transport networks satisfying Ω( Di+1 ) ⊆ Ω( Di) for i ∈ [[ k − 1]]. Then, the non-dominated labels generated by a bounded labeling algorithm on Di can be used to induce completion bounds when solving Di+1 . This requires that the initial label set for D0 contains all corresponding non-dominated labels. The efficiency of bounded labeling depends on the incumbent tour r∗, the dual vector σ, and the ng-memory structure. When the gap between lb (D, r ∗, σ ) and δ(r∗) is large, relatively few completion bounds are positive, so completion tests provide limited pruning while introducing computational overhead. As this gap narrows, completion bounds increase, allowing bounded labeling to discard a larger fraction of labels. The primal heuristic primarily improves δ(r∗), whereas column generation and ng-memory enlargement primarily improve lb .83.2.1 Variable fixing and sparsification 

Completion bounds are also used in Step 5 of Algorithm 1 to forbid arc-position states that do not belong to any elementary tour improving r∗, following the variable fixing framework of Irnich et al. (2010). The same decomposition argument used in the previous section yields the following proposition. 

Proposition 2. Let p ∈ [[ n]] and v, w ∈ [[ n + 1]] . If an elementary tour r ∈ Ω traverses arc vw at position 

p, then there exist compatible labels ℓ ∈ F and m ∈ B with p(ℓ) = p(m) = p such that ℓ and next( m) are non-dominated, and δb(next( m)) ≥ δb(r, p ).

Given a set L of forward labels, the variable fixing algorithm extends the backward bounded labeling algorithm by computing, for each arc-position state ( vw, p ), the maximum value t of δb(next( m)) among the enumerated backward labels satisfying v(m) = v, v(next( m)) = w, p(m) = p, and cb (m) ≤ 0. The deadline 

b(vw, p ) is updated to t, or set to −1 otherwise, thereby declaring the state infeasible. By Proposition 2, every elementary tour in Ω( D) remains feasible and preserves its makespan. Hence, the resulting transport network defines an equivalent TDTSPTW instance. A forward variable fixing algorithm is defined analogously but is not used in our framework. Like bounded labeling, the efficiency of variable fixing depends on the gap between δ(r∗) and lb . The same gap also determines how many arc-position states are removed from D. Unlike bounded labeling, however, variable fixing cannot discard a dominated label m before evaluating cb (m), since m may provide the tightest bound for an arc-position state. In our implementation, dominance checks are cheaper than evaluating completion bounds, making variable fixing considerably more expensive. The sparsification method for accelerating column generation relaxes variable fixing by replacing δ(r∗)with a threshold ρ ∈ R when computing completion values in (7). When ρ < δ (r∗), the corresponding completion bounds increase, leading to fewer arc-position combinations in the transport network. However, this reduced network may lack tours belonging to optimal solutions of MP, making subsequent pricing problems heuristic rather than exact. During the early stages of column generation, heuristic labeling is used to quickly generate columns for MP (Section 3). In this regime, allocating more computational effort to sparsification than to heuristic labeling is not desirable, since the generated columns may have limited impact on the final dual vector. Therefore, we further relax sparsification by ignoring the memory-inclusion condition when testing dominance, consistently with the relax-ng labeling algorithm. Additionally, relaxed sparsification is sometimes performed with ρ ≥

δ(r∗) to reduce the risk of generating a network from which no columns can be obtained in the subsequent pricing problem. Otherwise, the algorithm must revert to the original network, incurring the sparsification cost without retaining its benefits. 

# 4 Column generation 

Algorithm 2 presents our column-generation procedure, which implements Steps 3 and 4 of Algorithm 1 by improving σ and the incumbent solution. To reduce computational effort, non-dominated labels generated during pricing are used to sparsify a working transport network Dw, restricting subsequent pricing problems to tours deemed more promising. To this end, the algorithm is organized into consecutive stages S0, . . . , S k, executed throughout Loop 2– 12. Each stage combines a labeling method with a sparsification strategy. Stage S0 applies relax-all labeling without sparsification. Stages S1, . . . , S j apply relax-ng labeling with relaxed sparsification, progressively increasing the threshold value ρ. Stages Sj+1 , . . . , S k−1 apply exact labeling with sparsification, again pro-gressively increasing ρ. Finally, Stage Sk performs exact pricing without sparsification, computing the exact pricing lower bound lb and the complete set of non-dominated labels required by Algorithm 1. Within each stage, the algorithm proceeds through phases, each starting by resetting the working trans-port network Dw to the input network D (Step 1 or 10). In each phase, successive pricing problems are solved while Dw is progressively tightened through sparsification (Step 12) until the σ-bound lb meets the stopping criterion controlled by κS , which limits the tailing-off effect commonly observed in column generation. 9Algorithm 2 Column generation (high-level description) 

Input: a transport network D, an initial set of tours R, and an incumbent elementary tour r∗

Output: a dual vector σ and a set of non-dominated forward labels L 

> 1:

let Dw = D, S = S1, i = 0, and q = −∞ . 

> 2:

while true:  

> 3:

let σ be an optimal dual solution of the restricted MP defined by R, and d∗ be its optimal value.  

> 4:

let L be the set of labels obtained by the labeling method of S with input σ, and i = i + 1.  

> 5:

Add non-elementary tours in L with δ < 0 to R. 

> 6:

if L contains elementary tours : update r∗ with an elementary tour in L minimizing δ. 

> 7:

if lb ≥ κS d∗: 

> 8:

Run the primal heuristic on selected tours of R to improve r∗ 

> 9:

if S = Sk: output σ and L, and halt  

> 10:

Update S to the next stage if i < ι , and let Dw = D, i = 0, and q = −∞  

> 11:

else if lb ≥ q: 

> 12:

Apply the sparsification method of S to Dw with input L and σ, and update q.The variable i, updated in Step 4, counts the pricing problems solved during a phase and indicates the effectiveness of the current sparsification strategy. Each phase starts by solving one pricing problem on the input transport network Dw = D. Since q is initialized to −∞ in Steps 1 and 10, sparsification is always applied after this first iteration. If Dw becomes too restrictive and only supports a small number of additional pricing iterations before the stopping criterion is met, the algorithm moves to the next stage (Step 10), either weakening sparsification or strengthening labeling. This mechanism avoids repeatedly restarting from the input network D by progressively identifying configurations that maintain effective tightened networks over longer sequences of pricing iterations. The primal heuristic tightens the completion bounds used in sparsification and variable fixing, thereby accelerating pricing through a reduced labeling search space. Since applying it to all tours added to the restricted MP may be computationally prohibitive, a limited time budget is allocated. At the end of each phase, the heuristic is applied to selected tours in R that have not been previously processed. Although high-quality incumbents are often obtained early, the heuristic remains active because further improvements are valuable when solving some of the most challenging instances. 

# 4.1 Additional acceleration techniques 

We implement additional acceleration techniques that provide complementary improvements with a favorable trade-off between implementation effort and performance. First, we preserve information accumulated in the restricted MP when the state space changes. When 

r∗ improves, tours with δ ≥ δ(r∗) are retained in MP. Similarly, after augmenting ng-memories in Step 6 of Algorithm 1, some ng-infeasible columns are preserved by assigning them an artificially increased δ,discouraging their selection in the optimal solution. Although these columns no longer belong to Ω, they provide useful dual information during the early stages of the subsequent column-generation process. Second, we shrink time windows before starting Algorithm 2 and whenever r∗ changes. This procedure is well established for TSPTWs and time-dependent extensions (Ascheuer et al., 2001; Montero et al., 2017; Fontaine, 2024). Its adaptation to arc-position states follows the same principles, and details are omitted. Additionally, whenever r∗ is updated, we run backward labeling on D with σ = 0 to further tighten arc-position deadlines. Although this requires exact labeling, setting σ = 0 removes the profit component from Rule 2, substantially reducing the number of non-dominated labels. Finally, we apply the ng-memory cleaner (Appendix B) after each sparsification or variable-fixing oper-ation. The cleaner removes a vertex z from the ng-memory associated with an arc-position state ( vw, p )whenever it proves that no cycle starting at z can traverse vw at position p. This reduction decreases the size of the ng-memory structure and improves the efficiency of dominance comparisons. 10 5 Ng-memory augmentation (MA) 

Ng-memory augmentation (MA) is applied at Step 6 of Algorithm 1, after column generation has produced a dual vector σ yielding a strong σ-bound lb . It relies on a cycle-forbidding procedure applied to each tour 

r belonging to a set R. For each inclusion-minimal cycle ⟨v0, . . . , v j ⟩ of r starting at position p, it inserts v0

into M (vivi+1 , p + i) for i ∈ [[ j − 1]], thereby removing from Ω all tours traversing the cycle. The cycle-forbidding procedure motivates the use of arc-position states, since time windows and time-dependent travel times make the same cycle feasible at one position and infeasible at another, or lead to different completion times. This enables a more selective elimination of undesirable tours, allowing all inclusion-minimal cycles in a large set of tours to be forbidden simultaneously without excessively enlarging the ng-memory structure. MA first applies the cycle-forbidding procedure to the tours in the optimal solution of the restricted MP. Although this shrinks Ω, the resulting improvement in the σ-bound lb after the next column-generation iteration may be limited because only a few cycles are forbidden. It therefore exploits σ through Algorithm 3 to remove additional tours. The algorithm alternates forward and backward bounded labeling, applying the cycle-forbidding procedure to the obtained tours. It continues while the improvement in lb remains significant, as determined by parameter κ, which balances insufficient augmentation, causing more column-generation iterations, against excessive augmentation, causing computationally expensive pricing problems. 

Algorithm 3 Ng-memory augmentation (high-level description) 

Input: a transport network D, a dual vector σ, and a set of forward labels L

Output: a set of forward labels L 

> 1:

let d be the backward direction and κ be an initial gap threshold  

> 2:

while d is backward or δ(r∗) − lb < κ : 

> 3:

Update L to the output of the bounded labeling method in direction d with input L. 

> 4:

Select R as the tours with lowest δ among those represented by labels in L. 

> 5:

Apply the cycle-forbidding procedure to R, switch direction d, and update κ. 

> 6:

if d is forward : run the primal heuristic on selected tours to improve r∗.In some cases, Algorithm 3 executes several iterations, substantially increasing the ng-memory structure and potentially leading to expensive pricing problems in subsequent column-generation iterations. However, this typically occurs when the gap between lb and δ(r∗) is small and bounded labeling is computationally efficient. In such cases, Algorithm 3 further reduces the gap, allowing the exact search of Algorithm 1 (Step 7) to succeed and terminate the algorithm before solving any expensive pricing problem. The primal heuristic is incorporated only after forward labeling iterations, as updating r∗ after backward labeling could invalidate completion bounds. Since backward labels are generated for the current planning horizon δ(r∗), a label dominated under that horizon may become non-dominated under a tighter horizon 

t due to the time-dependent nature of the problem. Consequently, these labels cannot be safely reused to compute completion bounds for horizon t. This issue does not arise for forward labeling because all forward labels start at time zero. 

# 6 Exact search 

Exact search (Step 7 of Algorithm 1) aims to obtain an optimal solution of the TDTSPTW by progressively reducing the gap between the lower bound lb and the incumbent solution r∗. It considers a sequence of candidate makespan thresholds lb < t 0 < . . . < t k = δ(r∗). For i ∈ [[ k]], a backward bounded labeling that enumerates only elementary paths is executed using the set of forward labels L obtained after Algorithm 3 to compute completion bounds. The method uses ti as planning horizon and is given a limited computational budget. If this budget is exhausted, the exact search terminates without considering the remaining thresholds. Otherwise, if no tour is generated, Proposition 1 proves that no elementary tour in Ω satisfies δ(r) ≤ ti, and 

lb is updated to ti.11 Conversely, if a tour is generated, then an elementary tour with makespan at most ti exists. The algorithm then runs a forward bounded labeling method that enumerates only elementary paths, using the backward labels Lb obtained in the previous step to compute completion bounds. The method uses the same planning horizon ti and runs to termination. If an elementary tour is generated, the one with minimum δ is an optimal solution of the TDTSPTW; otherwise, no elementary tour with makespan strictly smaller than 

ti exists, implying that every tour generated during the backward phase has makespan exactly ti and is therefore optimal. Backward enumeration is performed before forward enumeration for the same reason discussed in Sec-tion 5: forward labels can be used to compute completion bounds independently of the planning horizon, whereas backward labels are valid only for the horizon under which they were generated. 

# 7 Experimental results 

We embedded Algorithm 1 into a branch-and-price framework B&P by modifying its stopping condition (Step 2) to handle the nodes of the branch-and-bound tree. We use strong branching on the arcs of the transport network (Røpke, 2012), following the implementation of Pecin et al. (2017). The configuration of the branch-and-price method and all algorithmic components is described in Appendix C. We implement B&P in C ++ 20 using CPLEX 12.9 as the LP solver. 1 All experiments are performed with a one-hour time limit on a single thread of a workstation equipped with an AMD Ryzen 5 5600 CPU@3 .5GHz and 16GB of RAM, running Debian through WSL on Windows 11. We compare B&P with the methods 

Ler22 (Lera-Romero et al., 2022) and Fon23 (Fontaine et al., 2023), which represent the state of the art among single-thread methods for the time-dependent TDTSPTW with loose and tight time windows, respectively. We do not compare against the time-independent solvers of Tardivo et al. (2026) and Soulignac (2026), even on the time-independent instances, as the former is GPU-based and the latter is restricted to instances with the tightest time windows. Extended results are reported in Appendix D. Across our experiments, we find no systematic variation in the relative performance of B&P , Ler22 ,or Fon23 associated with instance-generation parameters other than the number of customers and time-window width. We therefore organize the instances by these two characteristics, considering no, loose or moderate, and tight time windows in the following sections, followed by an ablation study of the sparsification mechanism. 

# 7.1 No time windows 

For the TDTSP (i.e., with no time windows), we consider the following benchmark sets: • Ada20 (Adamo et al., 2020): 180 randomly generated TDTSP instances for each n ∈ 15 , 20 , . . . , 60, for a total of 1800 instances. • Rif20 [T ]: 30 TDTSP instances for each n ∈ 10 , 20 , . . . , 60 obtained from the Rif20 benchmark (Sec-tion 7.2) by removing the time windows, for a total of 180 instances. Table 1 reports the results of our framework for selected values of n. For Ada20 , we also report the results of Ler22 . We do not report results for Fon23 or for Ler22 on Rif20 [T ], as these instances were not considered in the respective studies. The column s gives the number of instances solved to optimality, while t gives the average solution time over those instances. For our method, we also report tmax , the maximum solution time among the instances solved to optimality, and ×t and ×max , which scale t and tmax , respectively, to account for the processor speed difference between our machine and that used by Ler22 (1 .26 × according to Primate Labs, 2026). The results show a substantial performance improvement over Ler22 on instances with no time windows. On instances solved by both methods, B&P is about two orders of magnitude faster on average, while also solving substantially larger instances. This behavior is consistent with the motivation for redesigning the 

> 1Source code and supplementary results will be available upon acceptance

12 Ler22 B&P                                                                                    

> #nststtmax ×t×m
> Ada20 180 20 178 220 180 1212180 30 151 1544 180 523 628 180 40 78 2891 180 26 52 33 65 180 50 ——180 187 2639 ——180 60 ——167 780 3543 ——
> Rif20 [T]30 30 ——30 59——30 40 ——30 47 182 ——30 50 ——30 393 2003 ——30 60 ——21 1143 2805 ——

Table 1: Results for instances of the TDTSP (no time windows). framework: without time windows, pricing problems become harder, leading to small proportional gains after ng-memory augmentation, resulting in a less effective exact search. In contrast, jointly improving the dual vector and ng-memories, together with variable fixing, enables B&P to solve substantially larger instances. As we show in Section 7.4, sparsification helps accelerating the initial column generation phase before the first variable fixing. The results on Rif20 [T ] further support this behavior, with B&P solving most instances with up to 60 customers, including instances not considered in the original comparison. 

# 7.2 Loose and moderate time windows 

For the TDTSPTW with loose and moderate time windows, we consider three benchmark sets designed to evaluate the effect of time-window width. Each set is derived from a common base instance using a multiplier 

β ∈ 0, 0.25 , 0.5, 1. Given a base instance with tight time window [ a(v), b (v)] at each vertex v ∈ [[ n + 1]], the corresponding instance uses window [ βa (v), b (v)]. Thus, β = 1 preserves the original tight time windows, 

β = 0 .5 and β = 0 .25 yield moderate and loose time windows, respectively, whereas β = 0 removes release times while retaining deadlines. The benchmark sets are: • Ari19 (Arigliano et al., 2019): 300 randomly generated instances for each n ∈ 15 , 20 , 30 , 40 and 

β ∈ 0, 0.25 , 0.5, 1, for a total of 4800 instances. • Rif20 (Fontaine, 2024): 150 instances for each n ∈ 10 , 20 , . . . , 60 and β ∈ 0, 0.25 , 0.5, 1, for a total of 3600 instances. The benchmark is based on that of Rifki et al. (2020), which was generated using realistic traffic simulation with real data from the city of Lyon. Travel times are taken from shortest paths for departure times separated by six minutes. • Rif20 c(Fontaine, 2024): 60 TSPTW instances for each n ∈ 20 , 30 , 40 and β ∈ 0, 0.25 , 0.5, 1, obtained from Rif20 by removing time dependency, for a total of 720 instances. We also consider the Pes98 (Pesant et al., 1998) and Pot96 (Potvin and Bengio, 1996) TSPTW bench-marks, obtained by extracting vehicle routes from solutions to Solomon’s RC2 vehicle routing instances with time windows. Although these benchmarks contain at most 45 customers, they are considered difficult, with one instance still open according to López-Ibáñez and Blum (2023). We exclude the other benchmark sets collected by López-Ibáñez and Blum (2023) because they are all easily solved by Soulignac (2026). Table 2 reports the results of B&P , Ler22 , and Fon23 for selected values of n; the results for Ler22 

and Fon23 are taken from Fontaine (2024), and our processor is approximately 2 .51 times faster according to Primate Labs (2026). Missing entries correspond to unreported results. The results show that B&P solves all instances with n ≤ 40 and most instances with n ∈ { 50 , 60 }. As observed for Ler22 and Fon23 , its performance generally improves as time windows become tighter. Nevertheless, B&P remains competitive with, and overall slightly faster than, Fon23 for β = 0 .5, while its advantage is much larger for β ∈ { 0, 0.25 }.13 Ler22 Fon23 B&P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

> #nβstststtmax ×t×m
> Ari19 300 30 0300 1788 300 496 300 534 13 84 300 40 0126 2778 0—300 58 867 146 2177
> Rif20 150 30 0149 2176 149 397 150 9101 22 252 150 40 011 2902 0—150 131 2010 329 5044 150 50 0————137 817 3582 ——150 60 0————64 1669 3542 ——
> Rif20 c60 30 060 1376 60 129 60 420 11 49 60 40 034 2837 52011 60 69 653 174 1639
> Ari19 300 30 0.25 300 1084 300 145 300 427 11 68 300 40 0.25 244 2593 35 2444 300 40 425 100 1068
> Rif20 150 30 0.25 150 1503 150 68 150 415 11 37 150 40 0.25 132 2744 27 1950 150 33 381 83 955 150 50 0.25 ————149 202 1025 ——150 60 0.25 ————142 989 3479 ——
> Rif20 c60 30 0.25 60 643 60 29 60 331 877 60 40 0.25 58 2318 47 1221 60 34 188 86 473
> Ari19 300 30 0.5 300 389 300 5300 26514 300 40 0.5 300 1837 280 645 300 16 133 40 334
> Rif20 150 30 0.5 150 431 150 1150 26614 150 40 0.5 149 1450 150 35 150 10 35 25 88 150 50 0.5 ————150 49 204 ——150 60 0.5 ————150 258 2576 ——
> Rif20 c60 30 0.5 60 129 60 060 133760 40 0.5 60 888 60 26 60 821 19 53
> Pes98 27 19–44 —22 203 27 66 27 218 446
> Pot96 30 3–45 —25 160 29 83 30 353 9132

Table 2: Results for instances of the TDTSPTW with loose and moderate time windows. Interestingly, B&P performs slightly worse for β = 0 than on instances with no time windows, showing that adding deadlines alone can make the problem harder for our framework. This does not contradict Remark 1, since the generalization there relies on potentially discontinuous travel-time functions, whereas those in our benchmarks are continuous. Table 4 in Section 7.4 indicates that, for B&P , the gap between 

δ(r∗) and lb after the initial column generation is larger for β = 0. Consequently, although pricing is harder without time windows during the initial column generation, the first variable-fixing step removes more arc-position states, and fewer solver iterations are required to close the gap. This difference is not observed for 

Ler22 , which does not depend on variable fixing. For β = 0 .5, the performance gap with Fon23 is substantially smaller. This difference reflects the solving strategies of the two frameworks. Fon23 relies on a single exact best-first search, guided by alternative completion bounds, that becomes more effective as the time windows tighten. In contrast, B&P invests computational effort in obtaining strong dual information, which it then uses to progressively remove arc-position states and reduce the optimality gap. This strategy is particularly beneficial for loose time windows, but becomes less attractive as the windows tighten, when pricing over the larger set of ng-feasible tours can be more expensive than directly solving the increasingly well-structured exact problem. A similar trade-off explains Ler22 ’s behavior, whose first two phases obtain backward labels that provide completion bounds for the exact search in the final phase. 14 Finally, B&P solves all instances in the Pes98 and Pot96 benchmarks in few seconds, including the one reported open by López-Ibáñez and Blum (2023). 

# 7.3 Tight time windows 

To study tight time windows, we consider the Vu20 benchmark (Vu et al., 2020). These instances extend the generation procedure of Ari19 to larger numbers of customers, but restrict the time-window widths to 

w ∈ { 40 , 60 , 80 , 100 , 120 , 150 , 180 }, which are tighter than those used in Ari19 .                                                           

> Ler22 Fon23 B&P
> #nwstststtmax ×t×m
> Vu20 120 100 ≤80 120 58 120 0120 31 74 79 186 40 100 100 40 219 40 140 47 113 117 284 40 100 120 40 366 40 540 53 327 134 821 40 100 150 38 723 40 79 40 54 169 135 425

Table 3: Results for instances of the TDTSPTW with tight time windows for n = 100. Table 3 shows that B&P substantially improves upon Ler22 , but Fon23 is considerably faster, especially in the most restricted regimes. Results reported in the supplementary material explain this difference: the arc-position representation makes B&P spend non-negligible time shrinking time windows, whereas Fon23 

shrinks the time windows associated with the vertices almost instantly. B&P then incurs additional effort to obtain a strong dual vector over an already tightly constrained instance. This overhead becomes increasingly relevant as n grows, as observed in unreported experiments on the instances collected by López-Ibáñez and Blum (2023) with n > 50: in some cases, the initial column generation of B&P does not converge within the one-hour limit, whereas Fon23 and Soulignac (2026) solve the same instances in a few seconds. These results indicate that computing a strong σ-bound over the relaxed space of ng-feasible tours is not attractive for tight time windows, where A ∗-like exact search can exploit the temporal restrictions directly. This suggests combining A ∗-like exact search and column-generation based methods according to the time-window regime, as proposed in our previous work (Soulignac, 2026). 

# 7.4 Ablation studies 

In a first ablation study, we compare three configurations of the framework during the first iteration of Algorithm 1 (Solver). The full configuration B&P is the one used in all previous experiments. In the intermediate configuration NoPH , we disable the primal heuristic, so that the upper bound is obtained solely from tours generated during pricing. Finally, in the base configuration Base , we further disable sparsification by restricting column generation to three stages, corresponding to the relax-all, relax-ng, and exact configurations. We consider n = 50 customers on the Rif20 [T ] and Rif20 (β = 0) benchmarks, focusing on loose-time-window regimes. To ensure a fair comparison, we perform exactly four iterations in each direction of Loop 2–6 of Algorithm 3 (Ng-memory augmentation) in all configurations. We also exclude two instances that required less than 5 seconds for Ng-memory augmentation in at least one configuration. Figure 1 depicts Dolan–Moré performance profiles comparing NoPH and B&P , while Table 4 reports aggregated results. The columns labeled avg. report the average CPU time (CPU), column generation plus variable fixing time (CG+VF, Steps 3–5 of Algorithm 1), Ng-memory augmentation time (MA, Step 6 of Algorithm 1), gap percentage (Gap%), and number of feasible arc-position states (States) after the variable fixing step. The Gap% is computed as 100( δ(r∗) − lb )/δ (r∗), where r∗ and lb are the incumbent and lower bound obtained by each configuration. The rel. columns report the percentage of the Base value saved by each configuration, computed as 100(value Base − value X )/value Base . Larger rel. values indicate greater improvements over Base .15 CPU CG+VF MA Gap% States avg. rel. avg. rel. avg. rel. avg. rel. avg. rel.                                                                  

> Rif20 [T]Base 239 0179 060 06.58 081130 0
> NoPH 129 46% 80 55% 49 18% 5.17 21% 68187 16%
> B&P 133 44% 95 47% 38 36% 3.64 45% 51075 38%
> Rif20 (β= 0) Base 215 0160 055 016.62 095640 0
> NoPH 167 22% 115 28% 52 5% 15.25 8% 90610 5%
> B&P 153 29% 108 32% 45 19% 7.67 54% 74021 23%

Table 4: Effects of sparsification and primal heuristic on the first iteration of Solver 1. 

Figure 1: Dolan-Moré performance profiles for Rif20 [T ] (above) and Rif20 (below) on the first iteration of Solver 1. The aggregated results in Table 4 show that sparsification reduces the average time required by the first iteration by roughly one-fourth to one-half. Most of this reduction comes from column generation. Interestingly, sparsification also substantially reduces the average final gap when the primal heuristic is disabled. This improvement could be related to the smaller search space induced by sparsification, which may increase the likelihood that an elementary tour is among the limited number of tours obtained in each pricing iteration. However, sparsification may also eliminate states leading to elementary tours, so this interpretation is only a speculation. When comparing NoPH and B&P , the former is slightly faster on average on the instances without time windows but somewhat slower on those with loose time windows. Overall, the additional cost of the primal heuristic is justified by the substantially smaller gaps and number of arc-position states obtained by B&P 

in nearly all instances, providing a stronger starting point for subsequent iterations. In our second ablation study, we assess the overall impact of sparsification while retaining the primal heuristic. We compare B&P with NoSP , which extends Base by allocating the primal heuristic the same budget relative to pricing as in B&P . Again, we consider n = 50 on the Rif20 [T ] and Rif20 (β = 0) benchmarks. Table 5 reports the number of solved instances ( s), and the average CPU time ( t), and pricing, sparsification, and variable fixing time ( p) over the instances solved by NoSP , and the gap percentage over the instances not solved by NoSP (g). The aggregated results show that B&P solves more instances and requires less time on all instances solved by NoSP . The savings come almost exclusively from pricing, sparsification, and variable fixing, while the remaining computational effort is similar for both configurations. Figure 2 complements Table 5, showing that NoSP requires about 1.8 times (loose time windows) and 2.2 times (no time windows) the time spent by B&P on pricing, sparsification, and variable fixing on half of the instances, with ratios reaching up to 4.5 and 5.2, respectively. These ratios are computed over the instances solved by NoSP , which are all solved 16 NoSP B&P                           

> stpgstpg
> Rif20 [T]29 544 302 3.28 30 350 144 0
> Rif20 (β= 0) 131 1022 571 4.38 137 817 343 2.57

Table 5: End-to-end effects of sparsification. 

Figure 2: Dolan-Moré performance profiles for Rif20 [T ] (left) and Rif20 (right) on end-to-end experiments. by B&P as well, and thus do not reflect the additional instances solved only by B&P .

# 8 Conclusions 

We developed a new exact framework for the TDTSPTW that extends the solving capabilities of dynamic-programming-based methods to instances with loose or absent time windows. The framework substantially improves upon the method of Lera-Romero et al. (2022), solving all instances with up to 40 customers and a large fraction of those with 60 customers within the considered time limit, including TDTSP and TSPTW instances that could not be solved by previous methods. These results raise a broader question about the most appropriate algorithmic paradigm as temporal restrictions and time dependence are progressively removed. In both time-dependent routing without time windows and time-independent routing with loose time windows, dynamic-programming-based methods currently appear to have a substantial advantage over other exact approaches. In contrast, for the classical TSP, where both time dependence and time-window restrictions are absent, mathematical-programming-based methods have long been highly effective. Whether this change in the relative performance of algorithmic paradigms reflects an intrinsic effect of time dependence and temporal restrictions or simply the current state of the competing methods remains an open question. Addressing the time-dependent case requires considering TDTSP instances whose travel-time functions do not implicitly impose restrictions on the feasible arrival times at customers, since, as discussed in Remark 1, temporal restrictions can otherwise be encoded directly into the travel-time functions. The computational results also suggest that no single dynamic-programming-based strategy is likely to be uniformly effective across different regimes of time-window tightness. Decision diagrams and informed search methods that solve the exact problem directly, such as Fontaine et al. (2023); Soulignac (2026); Tardivo et al. (2026), benefit from tight time windows because they substantially restrict the feasible state space, whereas the additional effort required by column generation and ng-relaxations becomes increasingly worthwhile as time windows become looser. Identifying the transition between these regimes, and developing an effective instance-dependent algorithm selection strategy, remains an open question. The effectiveness of the proposed framework ultimately relies on balancing the bounding strength of σ

against the computational effort required to obtain it. Column generation and ng-memory augmentation progressively improve the σ-bound, while the primal heuristic improves the incumbent and, consequently, tightens the completion bounds used to restrict the network. In particular, completion-bound-based spar-sification substantially reduces the cost of the initial pricing problems, before variable fixing can effectively restrict the network, allowing the subsequent bound-strengthening mechanisms to become effective. The resulting interaction between primal improvements, σ-bounds, and selective network reduction at the arc-position level is key to preventing stronger ng-relaxations from causing a prohibitive growth in the pricing 17 state space. This balance appears to be essential for extending exact solution methods to the weakly con-strained regime of the TDTSPTW. 

# Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation process 

During the preparation of this work, the author used OpenAI’s ChatGPT (Luna 5.6) to assist with the editing and refinement of the manuscript, including improvements to sentence structure, organization, clarity, and scientific writing in English. The tool was also used to assist with the presentation of methodological details and experimental results. The author provided the underlying scientific content, methodological decisions, experimental results, and interpretations. After using the tool, the author reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the content of the article. 

# References 

T. Adamo, G. Ghiani, and E. Guerriero. An enhanced lower bound for the time-dependent travelling salesman problem. Comput. Oper. Res. , 113:104795, 2020. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2019.104795. T. Adamo, M. Gendreau, G. Ghiani, and E. Guerriero. A review of recent advances in time-dependent vehicle routing. Comput. Oper. Res. , 319(1):1–15, 2024. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2024.06.016. A. Arigliano, T. Calogiuri, G. Ghiani, and E. Guerriero. A branch-and-bound algorithm for the time-dependent travelling salesman problem. Networks , 72(3):382–392, 2018. doi:10.1002/net.21830. A. Arigliano, G. Ghiani, A. Grieco, E. Guerriero, and I. Plana. Time-dependent asymmetric traveling salesman problem with time windows: Properties and an exact algorithm. Discret. Appl. Math. , 261: 28–39, 2019. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2018.09.017. N. Ascheuer, M. Fischetti, and M. Grötschel. Solving the asymmetric travelling salesman problem with time windows by branch-and-cut. Math. Program. , 90:475–506, 2001. doi:10.1007/PL00011432. E. K. Baker. Technical note—an exact algorithm for the time-constrained traveling salesman problem. Oper. Res. , 31(5):938–945, 1983. doi:10.1287/opre.31.5.938. R. Baldacci, A. Mingozzi, and R. Roberti. New state-space relaxations for solving the traveling salesman problem with time windows. INFORMS J. Comput. , 24(3):356–371, 2012. doi:10.1287/ijoc.1110.0456. N. Christofides, A. Mingozzi, and P. Toth. State-space relaxation procedures for the computation of bounds to routing problems. Networks , 11(2):145–164, 1981. doi:10.1002/net.3230110207. V. Coppé, X. Gillard, and P. Schaus. Decision diagram-based branch-and-bound with caching for dominance and suboptimality detection. INFORMS J. Comput. , 36(6):1522–1542, 2024. doi:10.1287/ijoc.2022.0340. J.-F. Cordeau, G. Ghiani, and E. Guerriero. Analysis and branch-and-cut algorithm for the time-dependent travelling salesman problem. Transp. Sci. , 48(1):46–58, 2014. doi:10.1287/trsc.1120.0449. Y. Dumas, J. Desrosiers, E. Gelinas, and M. M. Solomon. An optimal algorithm for the traveling salesman problem with time windows. Oper. Res. , 43(2):367–371, 1995. doi:10.1287/opre.43.2.367. R. Fontaine. Exact and anytime heuristic search for the Time Dependent Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows . Theses, INSA de Lyon, July 2024. URL https://hal.science/tel-04697323 .R. Fontaine, J. Dibangoye, and C. Solnon. Exact and anytime approach for solving the time de-pendent traveling salesman problem with time windows. Eur. J. Oper. Res. , 311(3):833–844, 2023. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2023.06.001. 18 M. Gendreau, G. Ghiani, and E. Guerriero. Time-dependent routing problems: A review. Comput. Oper. Res. , 64:189–197, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2015.06.001. X. Gillard, V. Coppé, P. Schaus, and A. A. Cire. Improving the filtering of branch-and-bound MDD solver. In P. J. Stuckey, editor, Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research , pages 231–247, 2021. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-78230-6_15. S. Ichoua, M. Gendreau, and J. Potvin. Vehicle dispatching with time-dependent travel times. Eur. J. Oper. Res. , 144(2):379–396, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0377-2217(02)00147-9. S. Irnich, G. Desaulniers, J. Desrosiers, and A. Hadjar. Path-reduced costs for eliminating arcs in routing and scheduling. INFORMS J. Comput. , 22(2):297–313, 2010. doi:10.1287/ijoc.1090.0341. R. Kuroiwa and J. C. Beck. Solving domain-independent dynamic programming problems with anytime heuristic search. Proc. Int. Conf. Autom. Plan. Sched. , 33(1):245–253, 2023. doi:10.1609/icaps.v33i1.27201. G. Lera-Romero, J. J. Miranda Bront, and F. J. Soulignac. Dynamic programming for the time-dependent traveling salesman problem with time windows. INFORMS J. Comput. , 34(6):3292–3308, 2022. doi:10.1287/ijoc.2022.1236. M. López-Ibáñez and C. Blum. Benchmark instances for the travelling salesman problem with time windows (TSPTW). https://lopez-ibanez.eu/tsptw-instances , 2023. (Accessed: 30 November 2025). C. Malandraki and M. S. Daskin. Time dependent vehicle routing problems: Formulations, properties and heuristic algorithms. Transp. Sci. , 26(3):185–200, 1992. doi:10.1287/trsc.26.3.185. P. A. Melgarejo, P. Laborie, and C. Solnon. A time-dependent no-overlap constraint: Application to urban delivery problems. In L. Michel, editor, Integration of AI and OR Techniques in Constraint Programming ,pages 1–17, Cham, 2015. Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-18008-3_1. A. Montero, I. Méndez-Díaz, and J. J. Miranda Bront. An integer programming approach for the time-dependent traveling salesman problem with time windows. Comput. Oper. Res. , 88:280–289, 2017. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2017.06.026. D. Pecin, A. Pessoa, M. Poggi, and E. Uchoa. Improved branch-cut-and-price for capacitated vehicle routing. 

Math. Program. Comput. , 9(1):61–100, 2017. doi:10.1007/s12532-016-0108-8. G. Pesant, M. Gendreau, J.-Y. Potvin, and J.-M. Rousseau. An exact constraint logic programming algorithm for the traveling salesman problem with time windows. Transp. Sci , 32(1):12–29, 1998. doi:10.1287/trsc.32.1.12. J.-Y. Potvin and S. Bengio. The vehicle routing problem with time windows part II: Genetic search. IN-FORMS J. Comput. , 8(2):165–172, 1996. doi:10.1287/ijoc.8.2.165. C. Pralet. Iterated maximum large neighborhood search for the traveling salesman problem with time windows and its time-dependent version. Comput. Oper. Res. , 150:106078, 2023. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2022.106078. Primate Labs. Geekbench Processor Benchmarks. https://geekbench.com , 2026. Accessed: 2026-08-09. O. Rifki and C. Solnon. On the phase transition of the euclidean travelling salesman problem with time windows. J. Artif. Intell. Res. , 82:2167–2188, 2025. doi:10.1613/jair.1.18334. O. Rifki, N. Chiabaut, and C. Solnon. On the impact of spatio-temporal granularity of traffic condi-tions on the quality of pickup and delivery optimal tours. Transp. Res. Part E , 142:102085, 2020. doi:10.1016/j.tre.2020.102085. 19 S. Røpke. Branching decisions in branch-and-cut-and-price algorithms for vehicle routing problems. Presen-tation in Column Generation 2012 , 2012. I. Rudich, Q. Cappart, and L. Rousseau. Improved peel-and-bound: Methods for generating dual bounds with multivalued decision diagrams. J. Artif. Intell. Res. , 77:1489–1538, 2023. doi:10.1613/JAIR.1.14607. F. J. Soulignac. Beware of the classical benchmark instances for the traveling salesman problem with time windows. Comput. Oper. Res. , 191:107461, 2026. doi:j.cor.2026.107461. F. Tardivo, L. Michel, and W.-J. van Hoeve. Complete anytime decision diagram search with gpu-accelerated state expansion. In T. Guns, editor, Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research , pages 579–595, Cham, 2026. Springer Nature Switzerland. doi:10.1007/978-3-032-27242-3_34. C. Tilk and S. Irnich. Dynamic programming for the minimum tour duration problem. Transp. Sci. , 51(2): 549–565, 2017. doi:10.1287/trsc.2015.0626. D. M. Vu, M. Hewitt, N. Boland, and M. Savelsbergh. Dynamic discretization discovery for solving the time-dependent traveling salesman problem with time windows. Transp. Sci. , 54(3):703–720, 2020. doi:10.1287/trsc.2019.0911. 

# A Primal heuristic 

The primal heuristic is used to generate improved elementary tours from potentially non-elementary tours obtained during the solution process. It combines an elementary conversion procedure, a destroy-and-repair heuristic, and a local search phase based on classical TSP neighborhood operators, namely swap, 2-opt, and shift moves. These components are complementary: destroy-and-repair is particularly useful when time windows strongly restrict set of feasible tours, whereas local search becomes increasingly relevant as these restrictions are relaxed, especially in the absence of time windows. Given a tour r ∈ Ω, the heuristic first removes repeated visits, keeping only the first occurrence of each customer, and reinserts the missing customers using the greedy repair procedure. It then applies destroy-and-repair by iteratively removing a small number of consecutive customers and reinserting them in a random order. Insertions are evaluated lexicographically, first minimizing the total time-window violation and then the completion time. The heuristic is repeated until a fixed number of iterations without improvement is reached, after which the local search phase is applied. 

# B Ng-memory cleaning 

The clean-ng method reconstructs the ng-memory structure M of a transport network D while preserving the ng-feasibility status of all tours. For each vertex z, it removes z from M (vw, p ) whenever, after the removal, no M -infeasible tour contains a cycle starting and ending at z that traverses arc vw at position p.Starting from an empty memory structure M ′, the method processes one customer at a time. For each 

z ∈ [[1 , n ]], it builds a position-expanded digraph Dz containing a vertex vp for every vertex v ∈ [[ n + 1]] and position p ∈ [[ n + 1]]. For w ∈ [[ n + 1]] and p ≤ n, Dz contains an arc from vp to wp+1 if and only if 

z ∈ M (vw, p ). Consequently, every M -infeasible tour in D visiting z at positions i and j is represented by a path from zi to zj in Dz . Therefore, z can be safely omitted from M ′(vw, p ) if Dz contains no feasible paths traversing arc vpwp+1 .Each position-expanded vertex vp is associated with the time window [ a(vp), b (v, p )], where 

a(vp) = min {a(vw, p ) | w ∈ [[ n + 1]] },b(vp) = max {b(wv, p − 1) | w ∈ [[ n + 1]] }.

20 For every path in Dz from zp to zp+k, earliest arrival times and latest feasible departure times are computed according to (1) and (6), using the arc-position time windows of D. The only difference is that the base case of (1) initializes the recursion with a(zp) instead of the departure time 0 at the start depot, whereas the base case of (6) initializes the recursion with b(zp+k) instead of the end depot arrival time δ(r∗) defining the planning horizon. The method inserts z into M ′(vw, p ) if and only if Dz contains a feasible path from zi to zj traversing arc vpwp+1 . Such a path exists if and only if the minimum arrival time at vp from zi is no greater than the maximum feasible departure time from wp+1 to zj . These quantities are computed for every pair of layers 

i, j ∈ [[1 , n ]] using time-dependent versions of Dijkstra’s algorithm over Dz .The clean-ng method removes unnecessary memory restrictions, enabling additional label dominances while preserving the ng-feasibility status of all tours. Its effectiveness increases after variable fixing/sparsi-fication followed by time-window shrinking, since tighter arc-position time windows allow further memory entries to be safely removed. 

# C Algorithm Configuration 

The following paragraphs describe the configuration of the algorithmic components used in our computational experiments. 

Branching. We process branch-and-bound nodes using best-bound search. At each branching step, we evaluate the n/ 2 most fractional arcs by solving the restricted MP after fixing each arc to an integer value. We then select the min {3, k } best candidates for restricted column generation, where k is the minimum integer satisfying 

lb + (0 .01 + 0 .005 k)δ(r∗) > δ (r∗).

Each restricted column generation applies the first three stages of Algorithm 2 to add columns to the restricted MP. Candidates are evaluated using a product rule based on the optimal value of the resulting restricted MP. The primal heuristic is applied in each restricted column generation, and master problems are initialized with columns from previous iterations (Section 4.1). The limited numbers of branching candidates and column generation stages are motivated by the one-hour time limit, as allocating substantially more computational effort to these procedures provides limited expected benefits. 

Solver. To integrate the solver (Algorithm 1) into the branch-and-bound framework, we modify its stopping condition (Step 2). Instead of running to completion ( lb < δ (r∗)), we record the σ-bounds lb 0, lb 1, and lb 2

at the beginning, after column generation (Step 3), and at the end of each iteration, respectively. The solver stops if either g1 > 0.925 g0 and g2 > 0.95 g1, or g2 > 0.9g0, where gi = δ(r∗) − lb i for i ∈ [[2]]. Thus, a new iteration is performed only if it achieves sufficient gap reduction, either through a substantial improvement in one phase or through the combined effect of column generation and ng-memory augmentation. 

Column Generation. Each invocation of the column generation method (Algorithm 2) starts with stage 

S0, which applies relax-all labeling, followed by four stages S1, . . . , S 4 using relax-ng labeling with relaxed stabilization. The subsequent stages depend on whether the method is invoked for the first time at the root node of the branch-and-bound tree. In this case, the goal is to obtain strong completion bounds for applying variable fixing as early as possible and avoid repeated pricing on the complete transport network. Therefore, the intermediate exact stages with sparsification are skipped, and stage S5 performs final exact pricing without sparsification. Variable fixing is typically applied immediately after this iteration, although some instances require additional exact pricing iterations on the complete transport network. In subsequent invocations, stages S5 and S6 apply exact labeling with sparsification, while stage S7 performs final exact pricing. We set ι = 5 as the minimum number of pricing iterations performed within a stage before moving to the next one. Table 6 summarizes the configuration of each stage, where labeling denotes the labeling 21 method, stabilization the stabilization strategy, maxcols the maximum number of tours inserted as columns of MP after each pricing iteration, κ the phase completion criterion parameter, ρ′ the parameter used to compute the sparsification threshold ρ (see below), and q′ the parameter used to compute q, which controls the frequency of variable fixing (see below). Stage labeling stabilization maxcols κ ρ′ q′

S0 relax-all none 20 0 — —

S1 relax-ng relaxed 40 0 0.05 0.2 

S2 relax-ng relaxed 40 0 0.25 0.2 

S3 relax-ng relaxed 40 0 0.5 0.2 

S4 relax-ng relaxed 80 0 1 0.2 

S5 (first) exact none 100 0.95 — —

S5 (rest) exact non-relaxed 80 0.999 0.2 0.3 

S6 exact non-relaxed 80 0.999 0.4 0.3 

S7 exact none 100 text — —Table 6: Parametrization of the column generation stages Regarding ρ, recall that it replaces δ(r∗) when computing completion values in (7). We define it as 

ρ = (1 − ρ′)δ(r) + max {0, ρ ′δ(r∗)},

where r is the tour minimizing δ obtained from the forward labeling before sparsification. When δ(r∗) ≥ 0, 

ρ is an intermediate threshold between δ(r∗) and the best reduced cost. The max term handles early stages, where typically δ(r∗) ≪ 0, by preventing the first sparsification step from removing too many arcs and causing a premature stage transition. For q′, we aim to avoid sparsification when its computational cost is not justified by the expected im-provement. Therefore, we require the σ-bound lb to close a fraction q′ of the gap to max {d∗, δ (r∗)} between consecutive sparsification invocations, and set 

q = (1 − q′)lb + q′ max {d∗, δ (r∗)}

in Step 10 of Algorithm 2. Recall that d∗ is the optimal value of the restricted MP; it is typically higher than δ(r∗) in early stages and lower in later stages. Additionally, after the initial sparsification, at least ι = 5 pricing iterations are required before applying sparsification again. Finally, in stage S7, we modify the strategy for setting κ to enforce sufficient progress of the σ-bound lb .Column generation stops when 

lb ≥ 0.85 lb ′ + 0 .15 min {d∗, δ (r∗)},

where lb ′ is the last σ-bound obtained before starting column generation. Note that min {d∗, δ (r∗)} is an upper bound on the σ-bound, even when σ corresponds to the optimal dual solution of MP. 

Initialization of MP . We preserve at least half of the columns of MP after ng-memory augmentation. Columns corresponding to tours that are no longer ng-feasible receive a penalty of δ(r∗) − lb 1, where lb 1 is the σ-bound obtained at the end of the column generation phase. 

Ng-memory initialization. The initial ng-memory structure emulates a vertex-based ng-memory in which each vertex stores its five closest customers. Thus, for v, w, z, p ∈ [[1 , n ]], we insert z into M (vw, p ) if 

v̸ = w and both are among the five customers closest to z.22 Ng-memory augmentation. During the first three applications of the cycle-forbidding method in the forward direction, the threshold κ controlling the stopping condition is set to ∞, so the pricing problem is solved at least four times in each direction. For the i-th forward pricing problem with i > 3, we set 

κ = 0 .93 lb i−3, where lb j is the σ-bound obtained after the j-th iteration. Thus, the method continues only if the improvement in the σ-bound is sufficient. The set of tours computed in Step 4, whose cycles are forbidden in Step 5, contains at most 60 n tours. 

Exact search. We consider four equally spaced candidate thresholds t0, . . . , t 3. For each ti, the computa-tional budget is limited to max {10 6, k } non-discarded labels, where k is the number of non-dominated labels in the last pricing problem solved in the preceding ng-memory augmentation. 

Primal heuristic. We set the maximum number of non-improving iterations of the destroy-and-repair heuristic to n/ 2. In the destroy step, the number of removed customers is selected uniformly from ⌊n/ 20 ⌋

to ⌊n/ 10 ⌋, and the starting position of the removed subsequence is chosen uniformly at random. For local search, we use a first-improvement strategy and stop when no improving move is found. 

Primal heuristic time budgets. At the end of each column generation phase (Step 8 of Algorithm 2), we run the primal heuristic with a time budget equal to t/ 5, where t is the phase duration. Similarly, after each forward pricing problem in the MA method (Step 6 of Algorithm 3), we allocate a time budget of t/ 5, where 

t is the duration of the corresponding labeling method. At most a quarter of this time is spent converting non-elementary tours found in the current phase into elementary tours, processing them in increasing order of δ. The resulting tours are stored in a pool, from which those with smallest δ are selected for the destroy-and-repair heuristic. Elementary tours not selected remain in the pool and are considered in subsequent executions of the primal heuristic, and the pool is emptied at the end of each iteration of Algorithm 1. 

# D Extended Experimental Results 

Tables 7–9 report aggregated results for benchmark instances considered in the main text but not reported there.                                                                     

> Ler22 B&P
> #nststtmax ×t×m
> Ada20 180 15 180 38 180 0101180 25 164 220 180 210 313 180 35 145 2617 180 14 34 18 42 180 45 ——180 66 220 ——180 55 ——176 369 2986 ——
> Rif20 [T]30 10 ——30 00——30 20 ——30 11——

Table 7: Missing results for instances of the TDTSP (no time windows). 23 Ler22 Fon23 B&P 

# n β s t s t s t tmax ×t ×m

Ari19 300 15 0 300 5 300 0 300 0 0 0 1300 20 0 300 198 300 1 300 0 1 1 4

Rif20 150 10 0 — — — — 150 0 0 0 0150 20 0 148 363 150 0 150 0 2 1 4

Rif20 c 60 20 0 60 59 60 0 60 0 1 1 1

Ari19 300 15 0.25 300 3 300 0 300 0 0 0 1300 20 0.25 300 87 300 0 300 0 2 1 6

Rif20 150 10 0.25 — — — — 150 0 0 0 0150 20 0.25 150 89 150 0 150 0 1 1 2

Rif20 c 60 20 0.25 60 16 60 0 60 0 0 0 1

Ari19 300 15 0.5 300 2 300 0 300 0 0 0 0300 20 0.5 300 19 300 0 300 0 1 1 2

Rif20 150 10 0.5 — — — — 150 0 0 0 0150 20 0.5 150 15 150 0 150 0 1 1 1

Rif20 c 60 20 0.5 60 5 60 0 60 0 0 0 1

Table 8: Missing results for instances of the TDTSPTW with loose and moderate time windows. 

Ler22 Fon23 B&P 

# n w/β s t s t s t tmax ×t ×m

Vu20 120 60 ≤ 80 120 1 120 0 120 3 5 7 12 40 60 100 40 8 40 0 40 4 6 10 14 40 60 120 40 26 40 0 40 5 9 14 23 40 60 150 40 155 40 0 40 7 14 17 36 120 80 ≤ 80 120 8 120 0 120 10 19 25 47 40 80 100 40 53 40 0 40 17 31 42 78 40 80 120 40 97 40 0 40 20 47 49 118 40 80 150 40 193 40 2 40 32 260 79 653 

Ari19 300 15 100 300 0 300 0 300 0 0 0 0300 20 100 300 0 300 0 300 0 0 0 0300 30 100 300 0 300 0 300 0 1 1 1300 40 100 300 0 300 0 300 1 2 2 4

Rif20 150 10 100 — — — — 150 0 0 0 0150 20 100 150 0 150 0 150 0 0 0 0150 30 100 150 0 150 0 150 0 1 1 2150 40 100 150 0 150 0 150 1 2 2 5150 50 100 — — — — 150 2 5 5 14 150 60 100 — — — — 150 4 7 11 17 

Rif20 c 60 20 100 60 0 60 0 60 0 0 0 060 30 100 60 0 60 0 60 0 0 0 060 40 100 60 0 60 0 60 0 1 1 2

Table 9: Missing results for instances of the TDTSPTW with tight time windows. 24