Title: FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=XjbJR9374o

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

Virginia Aglietti 1 Ira Ktena 1 Jessica Schrouff * 1 Eleni Sgouritsa 1

Francisco J. R. Ruiz 1 Alan Malek 1 Alexis Bellot 1 Silvia Chiappa 1

## Abstract 

The sample efficiency of Bayesian optimization algorithms depends on carefully crafted acquisi-tion functions ( AF s) guiding the sequential collec-tion of function evaluations. The best-performing 

> AF

s can vary significantly across optimization problems, often requiring ad-hoc and problem-specific choices. This work tackles the chal-lenge of designing novel AF s that perform well across a variety of experimental settings. Based on Fun Search , a recent work using Large Lan-guage Models ( LLM s) for discovery in mathemat-ical sciences, we propose Fun BO , an LLM -based method that can be used to learn new AF s written in computer code by leveraging access to a num-ber of evaluations for a limited set of objective functions. We provide the analytic expression of all discovered AF s and evaluate them on various global optimization benchmarks and hyperparam-eter optimization tasks. We show how Fun BO 

identifies AF s that generalize well both in and out of the training distribution of functions, thus out-performing established general-purpose AF s and achieving competitive performance against AF sthat are customized to specific function types and are learned via transfer-learning algorithms. 

## 1. Introduction 

Bayesian optimization ( BO ) (Kushner, 1962; 1964; Mockus, 1974; Jones et al., 1998) is a methodology for optimizing complex and expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions that emerge in many scientific disciplines. BO has been used across a wide variety of applications ranging from hyperpa-rameter tuning in machine learning (Bergstra et al., 2011; Snoek et al., 2012; Cho et al., 2020) to designing policies     

> *Now at GlaxoSmithKline. 1Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Virginia Aglietti <aglietti@google.com>.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

in robotics (Calandra et al., 2016) and recommending new molecules in drug design (Korovina et al., 2020). Two main components lie at the heart of any BO algorithm: a surro-gate model and an acquisition function ( AF ). The surrogate model expresses assumptions about the objective function, e.g., its smoothness, and it is often given by a Gaussian Process ( GP ) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). Based on the surrogate model, the AF determines the sequential collec-tion of function evaluations by assigning a score to potential observation locations. BO ’s success heavily depends on the 

> AF

’s ability to efficiently balance exploitation (i.e. assigning a high score to locations that are likely to yield optimal function values) and exploration (i.e. assigning a high score to regions with higher uncertainty about the objective func-tion in order to inform future decisions), thus leading to the identification of the optimum with the minimum number of evaluations. Existing AF s aim to provide either general-purpose opti-mization strategies or approaches tailored to specific ob-jective types. For example, Expected Improvement ( EI )(Šaltanis, 1971; Mockus, 1974), Upper Confidence Bound (UCB ) (Lai & Robbins, 1985) and Probability of Improve-ment ( Pof I) (Kushner, 1962; 1964) are all widely adopted 

general-purpose AF s that can be used out-of-the-box across  

> BO

algorithms and objective functions. The performance of these AF s varies significantly across different types of black-box functions, making the AF choice an ad-hoc, empir-ically driven, decision. There exists an extensive literature on alternative AF s outperforming EI , UCB and Pof I, for in-stance entropy-based (Wang & Jegelka, 2017) or knowledge-gradient (Šaltanis, 1971; Frazier et al., 2008) optimizers, see Garnett (2023, Chapter 7) for a review. However, while these functions are often interpretable, they are generally hard to implement and expensive to evaluate, partly defeat-ing the purpose of replacing the expensive original optimiza-tion with the optimization of a much cheaper and faster to evaluate AF . In order to avoid the limitations of current 

> AF

s, several works have proposed self-adjusting the hyper-parameters of known AF s in a data driven way throughout the optimization process (Benjamins et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2022), combining different AF s in a portfolio and selecting them via an online multi-armed bandit strategy (Hoffman 1FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

et al., 2011) or computing a Pareto front over different AF s(Lyu et al., 2018). Other prior works (Hsieh et al., 2021; Volpp et al., 2020; Wistuba & Grabocka, 2021) have instead proposed representing AF s via neural networks thus bypass-ing the need for an analytical representation and learning new AF s tailored to specific objectives by transferring infor-mation from a set of related training functions via, e.g., rein-forcement learning or transformers. While such learned AF scan outperform general-purpose AF s, their generalization performance to objectives outside of the training distribution is often poor (see experimental section and discussion on generalization behavior in Volpp et al. (2020)). More re-cently, the concurrent work of Yao et al. (2024) investigated representing AF s in code for specific optimization settings where the experimentation budget is limited. Defining methodologies that automatically identify new 

> AF

s capable of outperforming general-purpose and function-specific alternatives, both in and out of the training distri-bution, remains a significant and unaddressed challenge. In this work we tackle this challenge by considering AF s rep-resented in computer code. Learning new AF s expressed in code presents three main difficulties: (i) the vast space of all possible programs makes exhaustive search infeasi-ble, (ii) efficiently exploring a constrained space of possible programs requires scalable methods and (iii) there is no clear criterion for ensuring the validity and effectiveness of generated AF s. 

Contributions. We overcome these difficulties by formulat-ing the problem of learning novel AF s written in computer code as an algorithm discovery problem and address it by ex-tending Fun Search (Romera-Paredes et al., 2023), a recently proposed algorithm solving open problems in mathematical sciences via LLM s. In particular, we introduce Fun BO , a novel method that explores the large space of AF s written in computer code by taking an initial AF as input and, with a limited number of evaluations for a set of objective func-tions, iteratively modifying it to improve the performance of the resulting BO algorithm. We focus on Python programs but Fun BO can be readily applied to languages supported by 

> F

un Search. Unlike existing algorithms, Fun BO outputs code snippets corresponding to improved AF s. This approach offers sev-eral advantages: (i) interpretability , as the code-based AF scan be directly inspected, analyzed, and understood. This allows for a clear comprehension of the logic behind the optimization strategy employed by the discovered AF , which contrasts with neural network-based AF s for which it is of-ten difficult to understand why they perform well or how they balance exploration and exploitation; (ii) deployability and simplicity . The AF s discovered by Fun BO are output as concise code snippets (e.g., Python functions) that can be readily integrated into existing BO libraries and work-flows with minimal overhead; (iii) leveraging foundational knowledge embedded in LLM s. Having been trained on vast corpora of code and text, these models possess knowl-edge about both programming constructs and existing BO 

strategies, which Fun BO utilizes to efficiently explore the program space and construct effective heuristics. We extensively test Fun BO on a range of optimization prob-lems including standard global optimization benchmarks and hyperparameter optimization ( HPO ) tasks. For each experiment, we report the explicit functional form of the discovered AF s and show that they generalize well to the optimization of functions both in and out of the training distribution, outperforming general-purpose AF s while com-paring favorably to function-specific ones. 

## 2. Preliminaries 

We consider an expensive-to-evaluate black-box function f :

X → R over the input space X ⊆ Rd for which we aim to identify the global minimum x∗ = arg min x∈X f (x). We assume access to a set of auxiliary black-box and expensive-to-evaluate objective functions, G = {gj }Jj=1 , with gj :

Xj → R, Xj ⊆ Rdj for j = 1 , . . . , J , from which we can obtain a set of evaluations. 

Bayesian optimization. BO seeks to identify x∗ with the smallest number T of sequential evaluations of f given N

initial observations D = {xi, y i}Ni=1 , with yi = f (xi).1 

> BO

relies on a probabilistic surrogate model for f which in this work is set to a GP with prior distribution over any batch of input points X = {x1, . . . , xN } given by 

p(f |X) = N (m(X), K θ (X, X′)) with prior mean m(X)

and kernel Kθ (X, X′) with hyperparameters θ. The pos-terior distribution p(f |D ) is available in closed form via standard GP updates. At every step t in the optimization process, BO selects the next evaluation location by optimiz-ing an AF α(·|D t) : X → R, given the current posterior distribution p(f |D t), with Dt denoting the function evalu-ations collected up to trial t (including D). A commonly used AF is the Expected Improvement ( EI ), which is de-fined as αEI (x|D t) = ( y∗ −m(x|D t))Φ( z)+ σ(x|D t)ϕ(z),where y∗ denotes the best function value observed in Dt,also called incumbent, z = ( y∗ − m(x|D t)) /σ (x|D t), ϕ

and Φ are the standard Normal density and distribution functions, and m(x|D t) and σ(x|D t) are the GP posterior mean and standard deviation computed at x ∈ X . Other general-purpose AF s proposed in the literature are: UCB 

(αUCB (x|D t) = m(x|D t) − βσ (x|D t) with hyperparame-ter β), Pof I (αPof I (x|D t) = Φ(( y∗ − m(x|D t)) /σ (x|D t)) )and the posterior mean αMEAN (x|D t) = m(x|D t) (denoted 

> 1We focus on noiseless observations but the method can be equivalently applied to noisy outcomes.

2FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

by MEAN hereinafter). 2

Unlike general-purpose AF s, several works have proposed increasing the efficiency of BO for a specific optimization problem, say the optimization of f , by either adaptively se-lecting and/or adjusting known AF s in a data-driven manner (Benjamins et al., 2023) or by learning problem-specific AF s(Hsieh et al., 2021; Volpp et al., 2020; Wistuba & Grabocka, 2021). The learned AF s are trained on the set G, whose func-tions are assumed to be drawn from the same distribution or function class associated with f , reflecting a meta-learning setup. “Function class” here refers to a set of functions with a shared structure and obtained by, e.g., applying scaling and translation transformations to their input and output values or evaluating the loss function of the same machine learning model, e.g., AdaBoost, on different data sets. For instance, Wistuba et al. (2018) learns an AF that is a weighted super-position of EI s by exploiting access to a sufficiently large dataset for functions in G. Volpp et al. (2020) considered settings where the observations for functions in G are lim-ited and proposed Meta BO , a reinforcement learning based algorithm that learns a specialized neural AF , i.e., a neural network representing the AF . The neural AF takes as inputs a set of potential locations (with a given d), the posterior mean and variance at those points, the trial t and the budget 

T and is trained using a proximal policy optimization algo-rithm (Schulman et al., 2017). Similarly, Hsieh et al. (2021) proposed FSAF , an AF obtained via few-shot adaptation of a learned AF using a small number of function instances in G.Note that, while general-purpose AF s are used to opti-mize objectives across function classes, learned AF s aim to achieve high performance for the single function class to which f and G belong. See Section A for an extensive discussion of related work. 

> F

un Search . Fun Search (Romera-Paredes et al., 2023) is a recently proposed evolutionary algorithm for search ing in the fun ctional space by combining a pre-trained LLM used for generating new computer programs with an efficient evaluator, which guards against hallucinations and scores fitness. An example problem that Fun Search tackles is the online bin packing problem (Coffman et al., 1984), where a set of items of various sizes arriving online needs to be packed into the smallest possible number of fixed size bins. A set of heuristics has been designed for deciding which bin to assign an incoming item to, e.g., “first fit.” Fun Search aims to discover new heuristics that improve on existing ones by taking as inputs: (i) the computer code of an 

evolve function h(·) representing the initial heuristic to be improved by the LLM , e.g., “first fit” and (ii) an evaluate 

function e(h, ·), also written in computer code, specifying    

> 2We focus on AF s that can be evaluated in closed form given the posterior parameters of a GP surrogate model and exclude those whose computation involves approximations.

the problem at hand (also called “problem specification”) and scoring each h(·) according to a predefined performance metric, e.g., the number of bins used in h(·). The inputs of both h(·) (denoted by h hereinafter) and e(h, ·) (denoted by 

e hereinafter), are problem specific. A description of h’s inputs is provided in the function’s docstring 3 together with an explanation of how the function itself is used within e.Given these initial components, Fun Search prompts an LLM 

to propose an improved h, scores the proposals on a set of inputs, e.g., on different bin-packing instances, and adds them to a programs database. The programs database stores correct h functions 4 together with their respective scores. In order to encourage diversity of programs and enable explo-ration of different solutions, a population-based approach inspired by genetic algorithms (Tanese, 1989) is adopted for the programs database ( DB ). At a subsequent step, functions in the database are sampled to create a new prompt, the 

> LLM

’s proposals are scored and stored again. The process repeats for τ = 1 , . . . , T until a time budget T is reached and the heuristic with the highest score on a set of inputs is returned. 

## 3. Fun BO 

> F

un BO is a Fun Search -based method for discovering novel 

> AF

s that increase BO efficiency by exploiting the set of aux-iliary objectives G. In particular, Fun BO (i) uses the same prompt and DB structure as Fun Search , but (ii) proposes a new problem specification by viewing the learning of AF s as an algorithm discovery problem, and (iii) introduces a novel initialization and evaluation pipeline that is used within the 

> F

un Search structure. Fun BO does not make assumptions about similarities between f and G, nor does it assume ac-cess to a large dataset for each function in G. Therefore, 

> F

un BO can be used to discover both general-purpose and function-specific AF s as well as to adapt AF s via few-shots. 

> F

un BO leverages the LLM s’ ability to generate executable code to make the search for novel AF s automatic and scal-able, potentially leveraging the extensive LLM s’ knowledge of BO and AF s while delivering more interpretable AF s than those represented by neural networks. Furthermore, while 

> F

un Search was only applied to problems that required evolv-ing functions with simple inputs (integers, floats or short tuples; with only one application taking as input a single ar-ray), Fun BO explores a significantly more complex function space where programs take as inputs multiple arrays. This demonstrates how the same formulation can be applied to problems of increasing complexity as long as an appropriate scoring mechanism is identified. 

> 3wide variet on Python programs.
> 4The definition of a correct function is also problem specific. For instance, a program can be considered correct if it compiles.

3FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch Inputs: GTr , GV , NDB , B, T

Setup: Initialize h (Fig. 6), e (Fig. 7-8) and DB with NDB islands. Assign h to each island. 

while τ < T do 

1. Sample two programs from DB and create prompt (Fig. 2, right) 2. Get a batch of B samples from the LLM 

3. For each correct hτ in the batch compute shτ (GTr )

4. Add correct hτ to DB and update it (see Appendix C) 5. Update step τ = τ + 1 

end Output: Return h in DB with score in the top 20th percentile for GTr and highest score on GV .

Figure 1. Left : The Fun BO algorithm. Right : Graphical representation of Fun BO . The different Fun BO component w.r.t. Fun Search (Romera-Paredes et al., 2023, Fig. 1) are highlighted in color. 

Method overview. Fun BO sequentially prompts an LLM to improve an initial AF expressed in code so as to enhance the performance of the corresponding BO algorithm when optimizing objectives in G. At every step τ of Fun BO , an 

> LLM

’s prompt is created by including the code for two AF 

instances generated and stored in a programs database (DB )at previous iterations. With this prompt, a number ( B) of alternative AF s are sampled from the LLM and are evaluated based on their average performance on a subset GTr ⊆ G ,which acts as training dataset. The evaluation process for an 

> AF

, say hτ at step τ , on GTr gives a numeric score shτ (GTr )

that is used to store programs in DB and sample them for subsequent prompts. The “process” of prompt creation,  

> LLM

sampling, and AF scoring and storing repeats until a time budget T is reached. Out of the top performing 5 AF son GTr , the algorithm returns the AF performing the best, on average, in the optimization of GV = G\G Tr , which acts as a validation dataset. When no validation functions are used (G = GTr ), the AF with the highest average performance on 

GTr is returned. Each Fun BO component highlighted in bold is described below in more detail, along with the complete algorithm and graphical representation in Fig. 1. We denote the AF returned by Fun BO as αFun BO .

Initial AF . Fun BO ’s initial program h determines the input variables that can be used to generate alternative AF s while imposing a prior on the programs the LLM will generate at successive steps. For these reasons it is important for guid-ing the search process effectively. We consider an initial acquisition function that takes the functional form of the EI 

and has as inputs the union of the inputs given to EI , UCB 

and Pof I (see code in Fig. 6). The AF returns an integer representing the index of the point in a vector of potential locations that should be selected for the next function evalu-ation. All programs generated by the LLM share the same inputs and output, but vary in their implementation, which 

> 5

In this work we consider the programs with a score in the top 20th percentile. 

defines different optimization strategies, see for instance the  

> AF

generated for one of our experiments in Fig. 3 (left). 6

Prompt. At every algorithm iteration, a prompt is con-structed by sampling two AF s, hi and hj , previously gen-erated and stored in DB . hi and hj are sampled from DB 

in a way that favors higher scoring and shorter programs (see paragraph below for more details) and are sorted in the prompt in ascending order based on their scores shi (GTr )

and shj (GTr ), see the prompt skeleton 7 in Fig. 2 (bottom). The LLM is then asked to generate a new AF representing an improved version of the last, higher scoring, program. 

Evaluation. As expected, the evaluation protocol is critical for the discovery of appropriate AF s. Indeed, a scoring mech-anism that captures small improvements in the proposed AF 

is needed to steer the LLM toward promising regions of the function space. Our novel evaluation setup, unlike the one used in Fun Search , entails performing a full BO loop to eval-uate program fitness. In particular, each function generated by the LLM is (i) checked to verify it is correct, i.e., it com-piles and returns a numerical output; (ii) scored based on the average performance of a BO algorithm using hτ as an AF 

on GTr . Evaluation is performed by running a full BO loop with hτ for each function gj ∈ G Tr and computing a score that contains two terms: a term that rewards AF s finding values close to the true optimum, and a term that rewards 

> AF

s finding the optimum in fewer evaluations (often called 

> 6

We explored using a random selection of initial points as an alternative to EI . However, this approach did not yield good results as using a random selection was incentivizing the generation of functions with a stochastic output, for which convergence results are not reproducible. 

> 7

When τ = 1 , only the initial program will be available in  

> DB

thus the prompt in Fig. 2 will be simplified by removing 

acquisition_function_v1 and replacing v_2 with v_1 .

4FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch                           

> """ Improve Bayesian Optimization by discovering anew acquisition function ."""
> def acquisition_function_v0 ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... (Full docstring in Fig. 8) """ #Code for lowest

−scoring sampled AF.            

> return ...
> def acquisition_function_v1 ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Improved version of ‘acquisition_function_v0 ‘. """ #Code for highest

−scoring sampled AF.                             

> return ...
> def acquisition_function_v2 ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Improved version of the previous ‘acquisition_function ‘. """
> def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... (Full docstring in Fig. 8). """ z=( incumbent

− predictive_mean ) /np.sqrt( predictive_var ) predictive_std = np.sqrt( predictive_var ) vals = ( incumbent − predictive_mean ) 

* norm.cdf(z) + predictive_std * norm.pdf(z)  

> return np. argmax (vals)

Figure 2. Left : Fun BO prompt includes two previously generated AF s which are sampled from DB and are sorted in ascending order based on the score achieved on GTr . The LLM generates a third AF , acquisition_function_v2 , representing an improved version of the highest scoring program. Right : OOD -Bench. Code for αFun BO (bottom) and average BO performance when using general purpose AF s and 

αFun BO (top). Shaded area gives ± std. dev. /2. The red line gives ¯Rt = 0 , i.e. zero average regret. 

trials). Specifically, we use the score shτ (GTr ) defined as : 

1

|G Tr |

> J

X

> j=1

"

1 − gj (x∗ 

> j,h τ

) − y∗

> j

gj (xt=0  

> j

) − y∗

> j

!

+



1 − Thτj

T

#

(1) where, for each gj , y∗ 

> j

is the ground truth optimal value, 

xt=0  

> j

gives the optimum found at t = 0 8, x∗ 

> j,h τ

is the found optimum for gj with hτ and Thτj gives the number of trials out of T that hτ selected before reaching y∗ 

> j

(if the optimum for function gj was not found, then Thτj = T to indicate that all available trials have been used). The first term in the square brackets of Eq. (1) quantifies the discrepancy between the function values at the returned optimum and the true optimum. This term becomes zero when x∗ 

> j,h τ

equals 

xt=0  

> j

, indicating a failure to explore the search space. Con-versely, if hτ successfully identifies the true optimum, such that gj (x∗ 

> j,h τ

) = y∗ 

> j

, this term reaches its maximum value of one. The second term in Eq. (1) captures how quickly 

hτ identifies y∗ 

> j

. When Thτj = T , indicating the algorithm has not converged, this term becomes zero, and the score is solely determined by the discrepancy between the discov-ered and true optimum. If, instead, the algorithm reaches the global optimum, this term represents the proportion of trials, out of the total budget T , needed to do so. Code for 

> 8

This is the input value corresponding to the optimal value found among the set of initial observations D. We assume this to be different from the ground truth optimum. 

the evaluation process is presented in Appendix B. 

Programs database. Similar to Fun Search , scored AF s are added to DB , which keeps a population of correct programs following an island model (Tanese, 1989). DB is initialized with a number NDB of islands that evolve independently. Sampling of hi and hj from DB is done by first uniformly sampling an island and, within that island, sampling pro-grams by favouring those that are shorter and higher scoring. A new program generated when using hi and hj in the prompt is added to the same island and, within that, to a cluster of programs performing similarly on GTr , see Ap-pendix C for more details. 

## 4. Experiments 

Our experiments explore Fun BO ’s ability to generate novel and efficient AF s across a wide variety of settings. In par-ticular, we demonstrate its potential to generate AF s that generalize well to the optimization of functions both in distribution ( ID , i.e. within function classes) and out of dis-tribution ( OOD , i.e. across function classes) by running three different types of experiments: 1. OOD -Bench tests generalization across function classes by running Fun BO with G containing different standard global optimization benchmarks and testing on a set F

5FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch         

> Figure 3. OOD -Bench. Different AF s trading-off exploration and exploitation for two one-dimensional objective functions (green lines). Blue and gray trajectories track the points queried by αFun BO ,
> EI and UCB over 150 trials (right y-axis).

that similarly comprises diverse functions in terms of smoothness, input ranges and dimensionality and output magnitudes. We do not scale the output values nor nor-malize the input domains to facilitate learning, but rather use the objective functions as available in standard BO 

packages out-of-the-box. In this case G and F do not share any particular structure, thus the generated AF s are closer to general-purpose AF s. 2. ID -Bench, HPO -ID and GP s-ID test Fun BO -generated AF swithin function classes for standard global optimization benchmarks, HPO tasks, and general function classes, re-spectively. As this setting is closer to the one considered by meta-learning approaches introduced in Section 2, we compare Fun BO against Meta BO (Volpp et al., 2020), 9

the state-of-the-art transfer AF .3. FEW -SHOT demonstrates how Fun BO can be used in the context of few-shot fast adaptation of an AF . In this case, the AF is learned using a general function class as G and is then tuned, using a very small (5) number of examples, to optimize a specific synthetic function. We compare our approach to Hsieh et al. (2021), 10 the most relevant few-shot learning method. We report all results in terms of normalized average simple regret on a test set , ¯Rt, as a function of the trial t. For an objective function f , this is defined as Rt = f (x∗ 

> t

) − y∗

where y∗ is the ground truth optimal value and x∗ 

> t

is the best selected point within the data collected up to t. As F          

> 9We used the author-provided implementation at github.com/boschresearch/MetaBO.
> 10 We used the author-provided implementation at github.com/pinghsieh/FSAF.

might include functions with different scales, we normalize the regret values to be in [0 , 1] before averaging them. Note that the mean and standard deviations shown in all regret plots represent the performance variation across the set of test functions, not across multiple independent runs of a  

> BO

algorithm on a single function instance. For instance, for OOD -Bench, the mean and standard deviation in Fig. 2 (right, top) are over the 9 distinct test functions. To isolate the effects of different AF s, we employ the same experimental setting across all methods in terms of: (i) the number of trials T ; (ii) the hyperparameters of the GP sur-rogate models (tuned offline); (iii) the evaluation grid for the AF , which is set to be a Sobol grid (Sobol’, 1967) on the input space; and (iv) the initial design, which includes the input point yielding the maximum function value on the grid. Note that we use a GP model with zero mean function and RBF kernel across experiments. Therefore, the discov-ered AF s are conditioned on this choice of surrogate model. We acknowledge that while this setup ensures a consistent comparison across all AF s by removing confounding effects (e.g., from the quality of hyperparameter optimization rou-tines), it might deviate from a fully realistic deployment scenario. For this reason, in Section D.6, we included a comparison of the AF s found by Fun BO for OOD -Bench when evaluated using the standard BO pipeline available in BoTorch, which employs default settings for aspects such as AF optimization, GP hyperparameter optimization, and the random selection of initial points. All experiments are conducted using Fun Search with de-fault hyperparameters 11 unless otherwise stated. We employ Codey, an LLM fine-tuned on a large code corpus and based on the PaLM model family (Google-PaLM-2-Team, 2023), to generate AF s. 12 

> OOD

-Bench. We test Fun BO ’s capabilities to generate AF sthat perform well across function classes by including the one-dimensional functions Ackley, Levy, and Schwefel in 

GTr and using the one-dimensional Rosenbrock function for GV. We test the resulting αFun BO on nine very differ-ent objective functions: Sphere ( d = 1 ), Styblinski-Tang (d = 1 ), Weierstrass ( d = 1 ), Beale ( d = 2 ), Branin ( d = 2 ), Michalewicz ( d = 2 ), Goldstein-Price ( d = 2 ) and Hart-mann with both d = 3 and d = 6 . We do not compare against Meta BO as (i) it was developed for settings in which the functions in G and F belong to the same class and, (ii) the neural AF is trained with evaluation points of a given dimension, thus it cannot be deployed for the optimization of functions across different d. For completeness, we re-       

> 11 See code at github.com/google-deepmind/funsearch.
> 12 Codey is publicly accessible via its API (Vertex AI, 2023). For AF sampling, we used 5 Codey instances running on tensor processing units on a computing cluster. For scoring, we used 100
> CPU evaluators per LLM instance.

6FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch               

> Figure 4. ID -Bench. Average BO performance when using general-purpose AF s (gray lines), the AF learned by Meta BO (black dashed line) and αFun BO (blue line) on 100 function instances. Shaded area gives ±std. dev. /2. The red line represents ¯Rt= 0 , i.e. zero average regret.

port a comparison with a dimensionality-agnostic version of Meta BO in Appendix D.1 (Fig. 9) together with all exper-imental details, e.g., input ranges and hyperparameters.  

> AF

interpretation: In this experiment, αFun BO (Fig. 2, right bottom plot) represents a combination of EI and UCB which, due to the beta*predictive_std term, is more ex-ploratory than EI but, considering the incumbent value, still factors in the expected magnitude of the improvement and reduces to EI when beta=0 . This determines the way 

αFun BO trades-off exploration and exploitation which can be visualized by looking at the "exploration path", i.e., the sequence of x values selected over t, as shown in the right plots of Fig. 3 ( t measured on the secondary y-axis). For objective functions that are smooth, for example Styblinski-Tang, the exploration path of αFun BO matches those of EI and  

> UCB

(top plot, note that trajectories are overlapping). In this scenario, all AF s exhibit similar behavior, converging to x∗

(red vertical line) with fewer than 25 trials. When instead the objective function has a lot of local optima (bottom plot) as in Weierstrass, both EI and UCB get stuck after a few trials while Fun BO continues to explore the search space eventually converging to x∗. Notice how in this plot the convergence paths of all AF s differ and only the blue line aligns with the red line, i.e., converges to x∗, after a few trials. Using αFun BO to optimize the nine functions in F leads to a fast and accurate convergence to the global optima (Fig. 2, right top plot). This is confirmed when extending the test set to include 50 scaled and translated instances of the functions in F (Fig. 9, right). Finally, note how the top right plot in Fig. 2 shows a surprisingly good performance of random search. This is due to random search perform-ing competitively on functions with numerous local optima, which are generally harder to optimize. Aggregating per-formance across all functions in F highlights that no single known general-purpose AF consistently outperforms the oth-ers . This aligns with the well-established understanding that the effectiveness of AF s can vary significantly across black-box functions and is consistent with findings reported in the literature (Perrone et al., 2019; Li et al., 2018). 

> ID

-Bench. Next we evaluate Fun BO capabilities to gen-erate AF s that perform well within function classes using Branin, Goldstein-Price and Hartmann ( d = 3 ). For each of these three functions, we train both Fun BO and Meta BO 

with |G| = 25 instances of the original function obtained by scaling and translating it with values in [0 .9, 1.1] and 

[−0.1, 0.1] d respectively. 13 For Fun BO we randomly assign 5 functions in G to GV and keep the rest in GTr . We test the performance of the learned AF s on another 100 instances of the same function, with randomly sampled values of scale and translation from the same ranges. We additionally compare against a BO algorithm that uses EI , UCB , Pof I, 

> MEAN

or a random selection of points. All hyper-parameter settings for this experiment are provided in Appendix D.2. Across all objective functions, αFun BO leads to a convergence performance that outperforms general-purpose AF s (Fig. 4). More importantly, despite using the same inputs of EI or 

> UCB

, Fun BO is able to reach performances that are compa-rable or superior to those of AF s that are parameterized by neural networks and use additional inputs (Fig. 4). In terms of interpretability, notice how the AF for Goldstein-Price (Fig. 12) can be written as σ2(x|D t)Φ( y∗−μ(x|D t) 

> σ(x|D t)

) thus giving a modified Pof I where the probability of observing an improvement over the incumbent is multiplied by the predictive variance. The AF s found in this experiment (code in Figs. 11-13) are “customized” to a given function class thus being closer, in spirit, to the transfer AF . However, in order to further validate the generalizability of αFun BO found in OOD -Bench, we tested this AF across instances of Branin, Goldstein-Price and Hartmann (Fig. 10, green line). We found it to perform well against general-purpose AF s thus confirming the strong results observed in OOD -Bench while being, as expected, slower than AF s customized to a specific objective. 

> HPO

-ID . We test Fun BO on two HPO tasks where the goal  

> 13 Throughout the paper we adopt Meta BO ’s translation and scal-ing ranges.

7FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch                       

> Figure 5. Average BO performance when using known general-purpose AF s (gray lines), the AF learned by Meta BO (black dashed line) and αFun BO (blue line). Shaded area gives ±std. dev. /2. The red line represents ¯Rt= 0 , i.e. zero average regret. Left :HPO -ID .Middle :
> GP s-ID with d= 4 .Right :FEW -SHOT .

is to minimize the loss ( d = 2 ) of an RBF -based SVM and an Ada Boost algorithm. 14 As in ID -Bench, we test the abil-ity to generate AF s that generalize well within function classes. Therefore, we train Fun BO and Meta BO with losses computed on a random selection of 35 of the 50 available datasets and test on losses computed on the remaining 15 datasets. For Fun BO we randomly assign 5 datasets to GV

and keep the rest in GTr . Fun BO identifies AF s (code in Fig. 15-16) that outperform all other AF s in Ada Boost (Fig. 5, left) while performing similarly to general-purpose or meta-learned AF s for SVM (Fig. 14). Across the two tasks, αFun BO 

found in OOD -Bench still outperforms general-purpose AF swhile yielding slightly worse performance compared to 

> M

eta BO and Fun BO -customized AF s (Fig. 14, green lines). 

> GP

s-ID . Similar results are obtained for general func-tion classes whose members do not exhibit any partic-ular shared structure. We let GTr include 25 functions sampled from a GP prior with d = 3 , RBF kernel and length-scale drawn uniformly from [0 .05 , 0.5] . We test the found AF on 100 other GP samples defined both for 

d = 3 and d = 4 and length-scale values sampled sim-ilarly. As done by Volpp et al. (2020), we consider a dimensionality-agnostic version of Meta BO that allows de-ploying the function learned from d = 3 functions on d = 4 

objectives. We found αFun BO to outperform all other AF s(code in Fig. 18) in d = 4 (Fig. 5, right) while match-ing EI and outperforming Meta BO in d = 3 (Fig. 17, left). In terms of interpretability, note how the AF found in this case can be simplified to be written as (EI**2) / (1 + (z/beta)**2 * sqrt(var))**2 . This function calculates the standard EI , squares it, and then divides it by a penalty term that increases with both the standard-ized improvement z=(incumbent - mean)/std and the uncertainty sqrt(var) . The squaring of the EI non-linearly amplifies regions with high EI values relative to     

> 14 We use precomputed loss values across 50 datasets given as part of the HyLAP project. For SVM , the two hyperparameters are the RBF kernel parameter and the penalty parameter while for
> Ada Boost they correspond to the number of product terms and the number of iterations.

those with low or moderate EI values. This increases the "peakiness" of the AF , leading to stronger exploitation of the most promising point(s). The term (1 + (z/beta)**2 * sqrt(var))**2 penalizes points more heavily if they have a very high EI (z is large and positive) and/or high uncertainty ( sqrt(var) is large). This might act as a regularizer against over-optimism or excessive jumps into highly uncertain areas, even if they look very promising according to EI . It’s a novel way of balancing exploration and exploitation discovered by Fun BO .

> FEW

-SHOT . We conclude our experimental analysis by demonstrating how Fun BO can be used in the context of few-shot adaptation. In this setting, we aim to learn an AF 

for a specific function class by “adapting” an initial AF with a small number of instances from the target class. We consider Ackley ( d = 2 ) as the objective function and compare against FSAF (Hsieh et al., 2021), the closest few-shot adaptation method for BO . FSAF trains the initial AF 

with a set of GP s, adapts it using 5 instances of scaled and translated Ackley functions, then tests the adapted AF on 100 additional Ackley instances, generated in the same manner. Note that FSAF uses a wide variety of GP functions with different kernels and various hyperparameters for training the initial AF . On the contrary, Fun BO few-shot adaptation is performed by setting the initial h function to the one found in GP s-ID (Fig. 5, right plot, green line) using 25 GP s with  

> RBF

kernel, and including the 5 instances of Ackley used by  

> FSAF

in GTr . Despite the limited training set, Fun BO adapts very quickly to the new function instances, identifying an  

> AF

(code in Fig. 19) that outperforms both general purpose 

> AF

s and FSAF (Fig. 5, right). 

## 5. Conclusions and Discussion 

We tackled the problem of discovering novel, well-performing AF s for BO through Fun BO , a Fun Search -based algorithm that explores the space of AF s by letting an LLM it-eratively modify the AF expression in native computer code to improve the efficiency of the corresponding BO algorithm. 8FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

We have shown across a variety of settings that Fun BO learns 

> AF

s that generalize well within and across function classes while being easily adaptable to specific objective functions of interest with only a few training examples. 

Limitations. Fun BO inherits the strengths of Fun Search along with some of its inherent constraints. While 

> F

un Search allows finding programs that are concise and interpretable, it works best for programs that can be quickly evaluated and for which the score provides an accurate quan-tification of the improvement achieved. Therefore, a po-tential limitation of Fun BO is the computational overhead associated with running a full BO loop for each candidate  

> AF

on every function in the set G. This limits the scalability of Fun BO for larger sets G and hinders its application to more complex optimization problems, such as those with multiple objectives. However, several practical scenarios exist where the functions in G are relatively inexpensive to evaluate, thus lowering the evaluation cost incurred during 

> F

un BO ’s discovery phase. For instance, G could consist of: (i) faster, lower-fidelity simulators or simplified analytical models related to the expensive target problem f ; (ii) cheap-to-evaluate surrogate models learned from previous related tasks; or (iii) hyperparameter optimization losses on smaller datasets where training and evaluation are faster than on the final, large target dataset. It is important to note that the computational cost incurred during this one-time search phase for a novel AF can be offset by its subsequent per-formance during online deployment, where the discovered  

> AF

may significantly reduce the number of costly function evaluations needed on the actual target problems. Furthermore, the simple metric considered in this work in Eq. (1) , only captures the distance from the true optimum and the number of trials needed to identify it. More research needs to be done to understand if a metric that better char-acterizes the convergence path for a given AF can improve 

> F

un BO ’s performance. In addition, each Fun BO experiment shown in this work required obtaining a large number of  

> LLM

samples. This means that the overall cost of experi-ments, which depends on the LLM used as well as the algo-rithm’s implementation (e.g. single-threaded or distributed, as originally proposed by Fun Search ), can be high. Finally, as reported by Romera-Paredes et al. (2023), the variance in the quality of the AF found by Fun BO is high. This is due to the randomness in both the LLM sampling and the evolutionary procedure. While we were able to reproduce the results shown for ID -Bench, HPO -ID and GP s-ID with different Fun BO experiments, finding AF s that perform well across function classes required multiple Fun BO runs. 

Future work. This work opens up several promising av-enues for future research. While our focus here was on the simplest single-output BO algorithm with a GP surrogate model, Fun BO can be extended to learn AF s for various adaptations of this problem, e.g., constrained optimization, noisy evaluations, multi-fidelity settings or alternative sur-rogate models. In addition, Fun BO can be used to search in the space of functions with different inputs thus potentially discovering, e.g., non-myopic AF s. Our method is inher-ently flexible and can accommodate such extensions, which we view as natural follow-up work. Additionally, Fun BO 

demonstrates the potential to harness the power of LLM swhile maintaining the interpretability of AF s expressed in code. This opens an exciting avenue for exploring how and what assumptions can be encoded within AF s, based on the desired program characteristics and prior knowledge about the objective function. Finally, the discovered AF s might have intrinsic value, independently of how they were discov-ered. Future work could focus on more extensively testing their properties and identify those that can be added to the standard suite of AF s available in BO packages. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## References 

Benjamins, C., Raponi, E., Jankovic, A., Doerr, C., and Lin-dauer, M. Self-adjusting weighted expected improvement for Bayesian optimization. In International Conference on Automated Machine Learning , 2023. Bergstra, J., Bardenet, R., Bengio, Y., and Kégl, B. Algo-rithms for hyper-parameter optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2011. Calandra, R., Seyfarth, A., Peters, J., and Deisenroth, M. P. Bayesian optimization for learning gaits under uncer-tainty: An experimental comparison on a dynamic bipedal walker. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence ,76:5–23, 2016. Chen, A., Dohan, D., and So, D. Evoprompting: Language models for code-level neural architecture search. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024a. Chen, L., Chen, J., Goldstein, T., Huang, H., and Zhou, T. InstructZero: Efficient instruction optimization for black-box large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 6503–6518, 2024b. Chen, Y., Hoffman, M. W., Colmenarejo, S. G., Denil, M., Lillicrap, T. P., Botvinick, M., and Freitas, N. Learning to learn without gradient descent by gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 748–756, 2017. 9FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

Chen, Y., Song, X., Lee, C., Wang, Z., Zhang, R., Dohan, D., Kawakami, K., Kochanski, G., Doucet, A., Ranzato, M., Perel, S., and de Freitas, N. Towards learning uni-versal hyperparameter optimizers with transformers. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 32053–32068, 2022. Cheng, J., Liu, X., Zheng, K., Ke, P., Wang, H., Dong, Y., Tang, J., and Huang, M. Black-box prompt optimization: Aligning large language models without model training. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2024. Cho, H., Kim, Y., Lee, E., Choi, D., Lee, Y., and Rhee, W. Basic enhancement strategies when using Bayesian optimization for hyperparameter tuning of deep neural networks. IEEE Access , 8:52588–52608, 2020. Coffman, E. G., Garey, M. R., and Johnson, D. S. Approxi-mation algorithms for bin-packing — an updated survey. In Ausiello, G., Lucertini, M., and Serafini, P. (eds.), Al-gorithm Design for Computer System Design , pp. 49–106. Springer, 1984. Ding, Q., Kang, Y., Liu, Y.-W., Lee, T. C. M., Hsieh, C.-J., and Sharpnack, J. Syndicated bandits: A framework for auto tuning hyper-parameters in contextual bandit algo-rithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 1170–1181, 2022. Fernando, C., Banarse, D. S., Michalewski, H., Osindero, S., and Rocktäschel, T. Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. In International Con-ference on Machine Learning , pp. 13481–13544, 2024. Feurer, M., Letham, B., and Bakshy, E. Scalable meta-learning for Bayesian optimization using ranking-weighted Gaussian process ensembles. In AutoML Work-shop at International Conference on Machine Learning ,2018. Frazier, P. I., Powell, W. B., and Dayanik, S. A knowledge-gradient policy for sequential information collection. 

SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization , 47(5):2410– 2439, 2008. Garnett, R. Bayesian Optimization . Cambridge University Press, 2023. Google-PaLM-2-Team. PaLM 2 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403 , 2023. Guo, Q., Wang, R., Guo, J., Li, B., Song, K., Tan, X., Liu, G., Bian, J., and Yang, Y. EvoPrompt: Connecting LLMs with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful prompt op-timizers. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2024. Hoffman, M., Brochu, E., De Freitas, N., et al. Portfolio allocation for Bayesian optimization. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , pp. 327–336, 2011. Hsieh, B.-J., Hsieh, P.-C., and Liu, X. Reinforced few-shot acquisition function learning for Bayesian optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,pp. 7718–7731, 2021. Jiang, A. Q., Li, W., Tworkowski, S., Czechowski, K., Odrzygó´ zd´ z, T., Miło´ s, P., Wu, Y., and Jamnik, M. Thor: Wielding hammers to integrate language models and au-tomated theorem provers. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , pp. 8360–8373, 2022. Jones, D. R., Schonlau, M., and Welch, W. J. Efficient global optimization of expensive black-box functions. Journal of Global Optimization , 13:455–492, 1998. Korovina, K., Xu, S., Kandasamy, K., Neiswanger, W., Poc-zos, B., Schneider, J., and Xing, E. Chembo: Bayesian op-timization of small organic molecules with synthesizable recommendations. In International Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 3393–3403, 2020. Koza, J. R. Genetic programming as a means for program-ming computers by natural selection. Statistics and com-puting , 4:87–112, 1994. Kristiadi, A., Strieth-Kalthoff, F., Skreta, M., Poupart, P., Aspuru-Guzik, A., and Pleiss, G. A sober look at LLMs for material discovery: Are they actually good for Bayesian optimization over molecules? In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 25603– 25622, 2024. Kushner, H. J. A versatile stochastic model of a function of unknown and time varying form. Journal of Mathemati-cal Analysis and Applications , 5(1):150–167, 1962. Kushner, H. J. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve in the presence of noise. Journal Basic Engineering , 86(1):97–106, 1964. Lai, T. L. and Robbins, H. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances in Applied Mathematics , 6(1): 4–22, 1985. Lehman, J., Gordon, J., Jain, S., Ndousse, K., Yeh, C., and Stanley, K. O. Evolution through large models. In Banzhaf, W., Machado, P., and Zhang, M. (eds.), Hand-book of evolutionary machine learning , pp. 331–366. Springer, 2023. Li, L., Jamieson, K., DeSalvo, G., Rostamizadeh, A., and Talwalkar, A. Hyperband: A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(185):1–52, 2018. 10 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

Liu, F., Xialiang, T., Yuan, M., Lin, X., Luo, F., Wang, Z., Lu, Z., and Zhang, Q. Evolution of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language model. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pp. 32201–32223, 2024a. Liu, T., Astorga, N., Seedat, N., and van der Schaar, M. Large language models to enhance Bayesian optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024b. Lyu, W., Yang, F., Yan, C., Zhou, D., and Zeng, X. Batch Bayesian optimization via multi-objective acquisition en-semble for automated analog circuit design. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 3306–3314, 2018. Maraval, A., Zimmer, M., Grosnit, A., and Bou Ammar, H. End-to-end meta-Bayesian optimisation with transformer neural processes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Meyerson, E., Nelson, M. J., Bradley, H., Gaier, A., Moradi, A., Hoover, A. K., and Lehman, J. Language model crossover: Variation through few-shot prompting. ACM Transactions on Evolutionary Learning and Optimization ,4(4), 2024. Mockus, J. On Bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. 

Proceedings of the IFIP Technical Conference , pp. 400– 404, 1974. Müller, S., Feurer, M., Hollmann, N., and Hutter, F. Pfns4bo: In-context learning for bayesian optimization. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 25444– 25470, 2023. Nasir, M. U., Earle, S., Togelius, J., James, S., and Cleghorn, C. Llmatic: Neural architecture search via large language models and quality diversity optimization. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference , pp. 1110–1118, 2024. Perrone, V., Shen, H., Seeger, M. W., Archambeau, C., and Jenatton, R. Learning search spaces for Bayesian optimization: Another view of hyperparameter transfer learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems , 2019. Polu, S. and Sutskever, I. Generative language model-ing for automated theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393 , 2020. Ramos, M. C., Michtavy, S. S., Porosoff, M. D., and White, A. D. Bayesian optimization of catalysts with in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05341 , 2023. Rankovi´ c, B. and Schwaller, P. Bochemian: Large language model embeddings for Bayesian optimization of chemical reactions. In Adaptive Experimental Design and Active Learning in the Real World Workshop at Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. Rasmussen, C. E. and Williams, C. K. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning . MIT Press Cambridge, MA, 2006. Romera-Paredes, B., Barekatain, M., Novikov, A., Balog, M., Kumar, M. P., Dupont, E., Ruiz, F. J., Ellenberg, J. S., Wang, P., Fawzi, O., et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature , pp. 1–3, 2023. Šaltanis, R. P. One method of multiextremum optimiza-tion. Avtomatika i Vychislitel’naya Tekhnika (Automatic Control and Computer Sciences) , 5(3):33–38, 1971. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. Snoek, J., Larochelle, H., and Adams, R. P. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2012. Sobol’, I. M. On the distribution of points in a cube and the approximate evaluation of integrals. Zhurnal Vychis-litel’noi Matematiki i Matematicheskoi Fiziki , 7, 1967. Song, L., Gao, C., Xue, K., Wu, C., Li, D., Hao, J., Zhang, Z., and Qian, C. Reinforced in-context black-box opti-mization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17423 , 2024a. Song, X., Tian, Y., Lange, R. T., Lee, C., Tang, Y., and Chen, Y. Position: leverage foundational models for black-box optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024b. Sun, T., Shao, Y., Qian, H., Huang, X., and Qiu, X. Black-box tuning for language-model-as-a-service. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 20841– 20855, 2022. Swersky, K., Snoek, J., and Adams, R. P. Multi-task Bayesian optimization. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 2013. Tanese, R. Distributed Genetic Algorithms for Function Optimization . PhD thesis, University of Michigan, 1989. Tribes, C., Benarroch-Lelong, S., Lu, P., and Kobyzev, I. Hyperparameter optimization for large language model instruction-tuning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial In-telligence , 2024. 11 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

Vertex AI, G. C. Code models overview. 2023. URL https://cloud.google.com/ vertex-ai/docs/generative-ai/code/ code-models-overview .Volpp, M., Fröhlich, L. P., Fischer, K., Doerr, A., Falkner, S., Hutter, F., and Daniel, C. Meta-learning acquisition functions for transfer learning in Bayesian optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2020. Wang, C., Liu, X., and Awadallah, A. H. Cost-effective hyperparameter optimization for large language model generation inference. In International Conference on Automated Machine Learning , pp. 21–1, 2023. Wang, Z. and Jegelka, S. Max-value entropy search for effi-cient Bayesian optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 3627–3635, 2017. Wistuba, M. and Grabocka, J. Few-shot Bayesian opti-mization with deep kernel surrogates. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Wistuba, M., Schilling, N., and Schmidt-Thieme, L. Scal-able Gaussian process-based transfer surrogates for hy-perparameter optimization. Machine Learning , 107(1): 43–78, 2018. Yang, C., Wang, X., Lu, Y., Liu, H., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., and Chen, X. Large language models as optimizers. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. Yao, Y., Liu, F., Cheng, J., and Zhang, Q. Evolve cost-aware acquisition functions using large language models. In Affenzeller, M., Winkler, S. M., Kononova, A. V., Trautmann, H., Tušar, T., Machado, P., and Bäck, T. (eds.), 

Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN XVIII , pp. 374–390. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024. Yogatama, D. and Mann, G. Efficient transfer learning method for automatic hyperparameter tuning. In Interna-tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ,pp. 1077–1085, 2014. Zhang, M. R., Desai, N., Bae, J., Lorraine, J., and Ba, J. Using large language models for hyperparameter opti-mization. In Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop at Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. Zheng, M., Su, X., You, S., Wang, F., Qian, C., Xu, C., and Albanie, S. Can GPT-4 perform neural architecture search? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10970 , 2023. 12 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

## A. Related work 

> LLM

s as mutation operators. Fun BO expands Fun Search (Romera-Paredes et al., 2023), an evolutionary algorithm pairing an LLM with an evaluator to solve open problems in mathematics and algorithm design. The idea of using LLM s as mutation operators paired with a scoring mechanism has been explored to create a self-improvement loop (Lehman et al., 2023), to optimize code for robotic simulations, to optimize prompts (Guo et al., 2024), or to evolve stable diffusion images with simple genetic algorithms (Meyerson et al., 2024). Other works explore the use of LLM s to search over neural network architectures described with Python code (Nasir et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024a), to find formal proofs for automatic theorem proving (Polu & Sutskever, 2020; Jiang et al., 2022) or to automatically design heuristics (Liu et al., 2024a). Symbolic regression, similarly to Fun BO , also searches for mathematical expressions, which are often represented as trees. However, while Fun BO employs an LLM for both generation and mutation, symbolic regression typically evolves these expressions using genetic operators (Koza, 1994). In addition, Fun BO operates directly on code representations and uses full  

> BO

performance as its fitness metric. Therefore, while both methodologies aim to find functional forms, their search space representations and primary evolutionary operators are different. 

Meta-learning for BO . Our work is also related to the literature on meta-learning for BO . In this realm, several studies have focused on meta-learning an accurate surrogate model for the objective function by exploiting observations from related functions, for instance by using standard multi-task GP s (Swersky et al., 2013; Yogatama & Mann, 2014), ensembles of  

> GP

models (Feurer et al., 2018; Wistuba et al., 2018; Wistuba & Grabocka, 2021) or neural processes that are trained to approximate the posterior predictive distribution through in-context learning on any prior distribution that can be efficiently sampled from (Müller et al., 2023). Others have focused on meta-learning general-purpose optimizers by using recurrent neural networks with access to gradient information (Chen et al., 2017) or transformers (Chen et al., 2022; Song et al., 2024a). Note that, while meta-learned surrogate models explicitly learn structure from past functions by observing data-points for each of them, methods that meta-learn AF s via G implicitly learn similarities between these objectives by observing the optimization pattern achieved by previously sampled AF s for each objective function in G. Interestingly, the most significant performance gains observed for the approach proposed by Chen et al. (2022) stem from using a standard AF (EI ) on top of the transformer architecture for output predictions. This confirms the continued importance of AF s as crucial components in 

> BO

, even when combined with transformer-based approaches, and highlights the importance of a method such as Fun BO that can be seamlessly integrated with these newer architectures, potentially leading to further improvements in performance. More relevant to our work are studies focusing on transferring information from related tasks by learning novel AF s that more efficiently solve the classic exploration-exploitation trade-off in BO algorithms (Volpp et al., 2020; Hsieh et al., 2021; Maraval et al., 2024). In contrast to prior works in this literature, Fun BO produces AF s that are more interpretable, simpler and cheaper to deploy than neural network-based AF s and generalize not only within specific function classes but also across different classes. 

> LLM

s and black-box optimization. Several works have investigated the use of LLM s to solve black-box optimization problems. Song et al. (2024b) discussed different ways in which foundational language models can revolutionize optimization, from harnessing the vast wealth of information encapsulated in free-form text to enriching task comprehension. Both Liu et al. (2024b) and Yang et al. (2024) framed optimization problems in natural language and asked LLM s to iteratively propose promising solutions and/or evaluate them. Similarly, Ramos et al. (2023) replaced surrogate modeling with LLM swithin a BO algorithm targeted at catalyst or molecule optimization. Kristiadi et al. (2024) also investigated whether LLM scan accelerate BO in the molecular space while Rankovi´ c & Schwaller (2023) explored the integration of LLM s with BO 

in the domain of chemical reaction optimization. Other works have focused on exploiting black-box methods for prompt optimization (Sun et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024b; Cheng et al., 2024; Fernando et al., 2024), solving HPO tasks with LLM s(Zhang et al., 2023) or identifying optimal LLM hyperparameter settings via black-box optimization approaches (Wang et al., 2023; Tribes et al., 2024). Concurrent to our work, Yao et al. (2024) propose using an LLM coupled with an evolutionary procedure to find cost-aware AF s. 

> AF

s representations Works proposing new meta-learned or general-purpose AF s can also be classified based on the representation used for the AF s. Unlike general-purpose AF s, for which an analytical representation is available, recent works have explored representing AF s via neural networks or code. Among the works using neural networks, Volpp et al. (2020) proposed a neural AF that is a MLP with ReLU activations while Chen et al. (2022) and Maraval et al. (2024) jointly trained surrogate models and AF s via transformers or neural processes. Instead, the recent work by Yao et al. (2024) represents AF sfor settings with limited experimentation budgets in code. 13 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch                                                                                                                                                          

> import numpy as np
> from scipy.stats import norm
> def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect in avector of eval points . Given the posterior mean and posterior variance of aGP model for the objective function , this function computes an heuristic and finds its optimum . The next function evaluation will be placed at the point corresponding to the selected index in avector of possible eval points . Args: predictive_mean : an array of shape [num_points , dim] containing the predicted mean values for the GP model on the objective function for ‘num_points ‘ points of dimensionality ‘dim ‘. predictive_var : an array of shape [num_points , dim] containing the predicted variance values for the GP model on the objective function for ‘num_points ‘ points of dimensionality ‘dim ‘. incumbent : current optimum value of objective function observed . beta: apossible hyperparameter to construct the heuristic . Returns : An integer representing the index of the point in the array of shape [num_points , dim] that needs to be selected for function evaluation . """ z=( incumbent

− predictive_mean ) / np.sqrt( predictive_var ) predictive_std = np.sqrt( predictive_var ) vals = ( incumbent − predictive_mean ) * norm.cdf(z) + predictive_std * norm.pdf(z)  

> return np.argmax (vals)

Figure 6. Python code for Fun BO ’s initial h function with full docstring. 

## B. Code for Fun BO components 

Fig. 6 gives the Python code for the initial acquisition function used by Fun BO , including the full docstring. The docstring describes the inputs of the function and the way in which the function itself is used within the evaluate function e. Evaluation of the functions generated by Fun BO is done by first running a full BO loop (see Fig. 7 for Python code) and then, based on its output (the initial optimal input value, the true optimum, the found optimum and the percentage of steps taken before finding the latter), computing the score as in the Python code of Fig. 8. Note how the latter captures how accurately and quickly a BO algorithm using the proposed AF finds the true optimum. 

## C. Programs Database 

The DB structure matches the one proposed by Fun Search (Romera-Paredes et al., 2023). We discuss it here for completeness. A multiple-deme model (Tanese, 1989) is employed to preserve and encourage diversity in the generated programs. Specifically, the program population in DB is divided into NDB islands, each initialized with the given initial h and evolved independently. Within each island, programs are clustered based on their scores on the functions in GTr , with AF s having the same scores grouped together. Sampling from DB involves first uniformly selecting an island and then sampling two AF sfrom it. Within the chosen island, a cluster is sampled, favoring those with higher scores, followed by sampling a program within that cluster, favoring shorter ones. The newly generated AF is added to the same island associated with the instances in the prompt, but to a cluster reflecting its scores on GTr . Every 4 hours, all programs from the NDB /2 islands with the lowest-scoring best AF are discarded. These islands are then reseeded with a single program from the surviving islands. This procedure eliminates underperforming AF s, creating space for more promising programs. See the Methods section in Romera-Paredes et al. (2023) for further details. 14 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

""" Evaluate an AF with a full BO loop for the objective f.""" 

import GPy 

import numpy as np 

import utils 

def run_bo (f, # objective function to minimize 

acquisition_function , # h given by LLM num_eval_points = 1000 , num_trials = 30): """ Run a BO loop and return the minimum value found and the percentage of trials required to reach it.""" # Get evaluation points for AF. get_eval_points () returns a given number of points on a# Sobol grid on the f’s input space eval_points = utils. get_eval_points (f, num_eval_points ) # Get the initial point with get_initial_design (). This is set to be the point giving the # maximum (worst) function evaluation among eval_points initial_x , initial_y = utils. get_initial_design (f) # Initialize GP hyper −parameters . We pre −compute the RBF kernel hyper −parameters # for each given f. These are returned by get_hyperparameters (). hp = utils. get_hyperparameters (f) # Initialize kernel and model. kernel = GPy.kern.RBF( input_dim = initial_x .shape [1], variance =hp[’variance ’], lengthscale =hp[’lengthscale ’], ARD=hp[’ard ’]) model = GPy. models . GPRegression (initial_x , initial_y , kernel) # Get initial predictive mean and var. predictive_mean , predictive_var = model. predict ( eval_points ) # Get initial optimum value. found_min = initial_min_y = float (np. min (model.Y)) # Get true optimum value. true_min = np. min (f( eval_points )) # Optimization loop. 

for _ in range ( num_trials ): selected_idx = acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , found_min ) # Get index for new point using AF. new_input = eval_points [ selected_idx , :] # Get new point. new_output = f( new_input ) # Evaluate new point. # Append to dataset . model. set_XY (np. concatenate (( model.X, new_input ), axis =0), np. concatenate (( model.Y, new_output ), axis =0)) # Get updated mean and var predictive_mean , predictive_var = model. predict ( eval_points ) found_min = float (np. min (model.Y)) # Get current optimum value. # Get percentage of trials (note that we remove the number of given points in the initial design ) needed # to identify the optimum . percentage_steps_before_converging = (np. argmin (model.Y) − initial_x .shape [0]) / (num_trials ) if found_min == true_min else 1.0 

return (found_min , true_min , initial_min_y , percentage_steps_before_converging ) 

Figure 7. Python code for the first part of e used in Fun BO . This function runs a full BO loop with a given number of trials and points on a Sobol grid to assess how efficiently a given AF allows optimizing f .

15 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch                                             

> """ Score an AF given the output of run_bo (). """
> import numpy as np
> def score(found_min , true_min , initial_min_y , percentage_steps_before_converging ): """ Compute ascore based on the output of run_bo (). """ #Get score based on how close the found optimum is to the true one (first term #in Eq. (1)). score_min_reached =1.0

− np. abs ( found_min − true_min ) / ( initial_min_y − true_min ) # Get score based on how the percentage of trials needed to identify the true # optimum ( second term in Eq. (1)). score_steps_needed = 1.0 − percentage_steps_before_converging    

> return score_min_reached +score_steps_needed

Figure 8. Python code for the second part of e used in Fun BO . Based on the output of run_bo(), this function computes a score capturing how accurately and quickly an AF allows identifying the true optimum. 

## D. Experimental details 

In this section, we provide the experimental details for all our experiments. We run Fun BO with T = 48 hrs , B = 12 and 

NDB = 10 . To isolate the effect of using different AF s and eliminate confounding factors related to AF maximization or surrogate models, we maximized all AF s on a fixed Sobol grid (of size NSG ) over each function’s input space. We also ensured the same initial design across all methods (including the point with the highest/worst function value on the Sobol grid) and used consistent GP hyperparameters which were tuned offline and fixed. In particular, we use a GP model with zero mean function and RBF kernel defined as Kθ (X, X′) = σ2 

> f

exp (−|| X − X′|| 2/2ℓ2) with θ = ( ℓ, σ 2 

> f

) where ℓ and σ2 

> f

are the length-scale and kernel variance respectively. The Gaussian likelihood noise σ2 is set to 1e − 5 unless otherwise stated. We set T = 30 for all experiments apart from HPO -ID and GP s-ID for which we use T = 20 to ensure faster evaluations of generated AF s. We used the Meta BO implementation provided by the authors at github.com/boschresearch/MetaBO, retaining default parameters except for removing the local maximization of AF s and ensuring consistency in the initial design. We followed the same procedure for FSAF , using code available at github.com/pinghsieh/FSAF. We ran UCB with 

β = 1 . Experiment-specific settings are detailed below. 

D.1. OOD -Bench 

The parameter configurations adopted for each objective function used in this experiment, either in G or in F, are given in Table 1. Notice that for Hartmann with d = 3 we use an ARD kernel. Scaled and translated functions are obtained with translations sampled uniformly in [−0.1, 0.1] d and scalings sampled uniformly in [0 .9, 1.1] . Fig. 9 gives the results achieved by αFun BO (blue line) and a dimensionality-agnostic version of Meta BO that does not take the possible evaluation points as input to the neural AF . This allows the neural AF to be trained on one-dimensional functions and be used to optimize functions across input dimensions. 

D.2. ID -Bench 

The parameter configurations for Branin, Goldstein-Price and Hartmann are given in Table 2. For this experiment, we adopt the parameters used by Volpp et al. (2020) thus optimize the functions in the unit-hypercube and use ARD RBF kernels. Fig. 10 gives the results achieved by αFun BO (blue line) and the AF found by Fun BO for OOD -Bench (green). The Python code for the found AF s is given in Figs. 11-13. 16 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

Figure 9. OOD -Bench. Average BO performance when using known general-purpose AF s (gray lines with different patterns), the AF 

learned by a dimensionality-agnostic version of Meta BO (Meta BO -DA , black dashed line) and αFun BO (blue line). Shaded area gives ± std. dev. /2. The red line represents ¯Rt = 0 , i.e., zero average regret. Left : F includes nine different synthetic functions. Right : Extended test set including, for each function in F, 50 randomly scaled and translated instances. 

Figure 10. ID -Bench. Average BO performance when using known general-purpose AF s (gray lines with different patterns), αFun BO found in 

> OOD

-Bench (green line), the AF learned by Meta BO (black dashed line) and αFun BO (blue line) on 100 instances of Branin, Goldstein-Price and Hartmann. Shaded area gives ± std. dev. /2. The red line represents ¯Rt = 0 , i.e., zero average regret. 

17 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

import numpy as np 

from scipy.stats import norm 

def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... """ y_pred = predictive_mean + 2 * predictive_var diff_current_best_y_pred = incumbent − y_pred bound_standard_deviation = np. maximum (np.sqrt( predictive_var ), 1e −15) z = diff_current_best_y_pred / bound_standard_deviation vals = ( diff_current_best_y_pred * norm.cdf(z) + np.sqrt( predictive_var ) * norm.cdf(z + 0.5) + (norm.cdf(z) − norm.cdf(z + 0.5)) * predictive_var / 2) a = np. maximum ( diff_current_best_y_pred , incumbent ) alpha = diff_current_best_y_pred if incumbent > 0.0 else −np.inf alpha = np. maximum (alpha , 0.) * (−alpha + 0.5 * a) − y_pred y_vals = np. absolute (alpha + a + np. abs ( y_pred )) * (a >= 0.) 

for y_val in y_vals : idx = np. argmax(vals − (y_val − y_pred) / bound_standard_deviation ) vals[idx] = 0

return np.argmax (vals) 

Figure 11. ID -Bench. Python code for αFun BO for Branin. The BO performance corresponding to this AF is given in Fig. 4 (left). 

import numpy as np 

from scipy.stats import norm 

def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... """ shape , dim = predictive_mean .shape best_score = 0.0 g_i = 0.0 predictive_var [( shape −10)//2] *= dim predictive_var [~ np. isfinite ( predictive_var )] = 1.0 

for i in range ( predictive_mean .shape [0]): curr_z = ( incumbent − predictive_mean [i]) / np.sqrt( predictive_var [i]) new_score = predictive_var [i] * norm.cdf(curr_z , 0.5) 

if new_score > best_score : best_score = new_score g_i = i

return g_i 

Figure 12. ID -Bench. Python code for αFun BO for Goldstein-Price. The BO performance corresponding to this AF is given in Fig. 4 (middle). 

18 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch   

> Table 1. Parameters used for OOD -Bench.

d X NSG ℓ σ2 

> f

σ2

Ackley 1 [−4, 4] 1000 0.21 28.19 1e − 5

Levy 1 [−10 , 10] 1000 1.05 83.32 1e − 5

Schwefel 1 [−500 , 500] 1000 18.46 76868.65 1e − 5

Rosenbrock 1 [−5, 10] 1000 1.20 87328.20 1e − 5

Sphere 1 [−5, 5] 1000 18.46 924202.43 1e − 5

Styblinski-Tang 1 [−5, 5] 1000 7.34 119522207.86 1e − 5

Weierstrass 1 [−0.5, 0.5] 1000 0.01 0.39 1e − 5

Beale 2 [−4, 5] 2 10000 0.46 546837.32 1e − 5

Branin 2 [−5, 10] × [0 , 15] 10000 4.65 155233.52 1e − 5

Michalewicz 2 [0 , π ]2 10000 0.22 0.10 1e − 5

Goldstein-Price 2 [−2, 2] 2 10000 0.27 117903.96 1e − 5

Hartmann-3 3 [0 , 1] 3 1728 [0 .716 , 0.298 , 0.186] 0.83 1.688e − 11 

Hartmann-6 6 [0 , 1] 6 729 1.0 1.0 1e − 5  

> Table 2. Parameters used for ID -Bench.

d X NSG ℓ σ2 

> f

σ2

Branin 2 [0 , 1] 2 961 [0 .235 , 0.578] 2.0 8.9e − 16 

Goldstein-Price 2 [0 , 1] 2 961 [0 .130 , 0.07] 0.616 1e − 6

Hartmann-3 3 [0 , 1] 3 1728 [0 .716 , 0.298 , 0.186] 0.83 1.688e − 11 

D.3. HPO -ID 

For this experiment, we adopt the GP hyperparameters used by Volpp et al. (2020). From the training datasets used in 

> M

eta BO , we assign “bands”, “wine”, “coil2000”, “winequality-red” and “titanic” for Adaboost, and “bands”, “breast-cancer”, “banana”, “yeast” and “vehicle” for SVM to GV. We keep the rest in GTr . Fig. 14 gives the results achieved by αFun BO (blue lines) and the AF found by Fun BO for OOD -Bench (green lines). The Python code for the found AF s is given in Figs. 15-16. 

D.4. GP s-ID 

The functions included in G and F are sampled from a GP prior with RBF kernel and length-scale values drawn uniformly from 

[0 .05 , 0.5] . The functions are optimized in the input space [0 , 1] 3 with NSG = 1728 points. In terms of GP hyperparameters, we set σ2 

> f

= 1 .0, σ2 = 1e − 20 and use the length-scale value used to sample each function as ℓ. Fig. 17 gives the results achieved by αFun BO and the AF found by Fun BO for OOD -Bench. The Python code for αFun BO is given in Fig. 18. 

D.5. FEW -SHOT 

For this experiment, the 5 Ackley functions used to “adapt” the initial AF are obtained by scaling and translating the output and inputs values with translations and scalings uniformly sampled in [−0.1, 0.1] d and [0 .9, 1.1] respectively. The test set includes 100 instances of Ackley similarly obtained with scale and translation values in [0 .7, 1.3] and [−0.3, 0.3] d

respectively. Furthermore, we consider [0 , 1] 2 as input space and use NSB = 1000 . The GP hyperparameters are set to 

ℓ = [0 .07 , 0.018] (ARD kernel), σ2 

> f

= 1 .0 and σ2 = 8 .9e − 16 . Python code for αFun BO is given in Fig. 19. 

D.6. OOD -Bench with BoTorch eval pipeline 

To ensure a consistent comparison across all AF s, in the manuscript, we have presented results obtained by testing AF s using a fixed Sobol grid, fixed hyperparameters (tuned offline), and a fixed initial design that includes the input point yielding the maximum function value on the grid. As this setup might deviate from a fully realistic deployment scenario, in this section, 19 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

import numpy as np 

from scipy.stats import norm 

from scipy import stats 

def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... """ diff_current_best_mean = incumbent − predictive_mean standard_deviation = np.sqrt( predictive_var ) z = diff_current_best_mean / standard_deviation vals = diff_current_best_mean * norm.cdf(z) ** 3 + (norm.cdf(z) ** 2 + norm.cdf(z) + 1) * norm.pdf(z) index = np. argmax (stats. truncnorm .cdf(vals , a= −0.1, b=0.1)) 

return index 

Figure 13. ID -Bench. Python code for αFun BO for Hartmann. The BO performance corresponding to this AF is given in Fig. 4 (right). 

Figure 14. HPO -ID . Average BO performance when using known general-purpose AF s (gray lines with different patterns), a meta-learned 

AF by Meta BO (black dashed line), αFun BO found in OOD -Bench (green lines) and αFun BO (blue lines). Shaded area gives ± std. dev. /2. The red line represents ¯Rt = 0 , i.e., zero average regret. 

import numpy as np 

from scipy.stats import norm 

def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... """ c1 = np.exp( −beta) c2 = 2.0 * beta * np.exp( −beta) alpha = np.sqrt (2.0) * beta * np.sqrt( predictive_var ) z = ( incumbent − predictive_mean ) / alpha vals = −abs (c1 * np.exp( − np.power(z, 2)) − 1.0 + c1 + incumbent ) + 2.0 * beta * np.power(z+c2 , 2) vals −= np.log(np.power(alpha , 2)) vals[np.argmin (vals )] = 1.0 

return np.argmin (vals) 

Figure 15. HPO -ID . Python code for αFun BO for Ada Boost. The BO performance corresponding to this AF is given in Fig. 5 (left). 

20 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

import numpy as np 

from scipy.stats import norm 

def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... """ z = ( incumbent − predictive_mean ) / np.sqrt( predictive_var ) vals = ( incumbent − predictive_mean ) * norm.cdf(z ) + np.sqrt( predictive_var ) * norm.pdf(z) t0_val = norm(loc=incumbent , scale=np.sqrt( predictive_var )). pdf( incumbent ) t1_val = z * norm.pdf(z) vals = (( vals * t1_val − t0_val ) / (1 − 2 * t1_val ) + t1_val *(vals/(1 −2*t1_val )) 

− vals /(1 − 2*t1_val) ** 2 + t1_val *(t1_val − z)/ beta) 

return np.argmax (vals) 

Figure 16. HPO -ID . Python code for αFun BO for SVM . The BO performance corresponding to this AF is given in Fig. 14 (right). 

Figure 17. Average BO performance when using known general-purpose AF s (gray lines with different patterns), the AF learned by Meta BO 

(black dashed line), αFun BO found in OOD -Bench (green lines) and αFun BO (blue lines). Shaded area gives ± std. dev. /2. The red line represents ¯Rt = 0 , i.e. zero average regret. Left : GP s-ID . F includes functions with d = 3 . Right : F includes functions with d = 4 .

import numpy as np 

from scipy.stats import norm 

def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta = 1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... """ z = ( incumbent − predictive_mean ) / np.sqrt( predictive_var ) vals = (( incumbent − predictive_mean ) * norm.cdf(z ) + np.sqrt( predictive_var ) * norm.pdf(z)) ** 2vals = vals / (1 + (z / beta) ** 2 * np.sqrt( predictive_var)) ** 2

return np.argmax (vals) 

Figure 18. GP s-ID . Python code for αFun BO . The BO performance corresponding to this AF is given in Fig. 5 (right). 

21 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch                              

> import numpy as np
> from scipy.stats import norm
> def acquisition_function ( predictive_mean , predictive_var , incumbent , beta =1.0): """ Returns the index of the point to collect ... """ num_points , _=predictive_mean .shape a=10 z=( predictive_mean +0.000001

− incumbent ) / np.sqrt( predictive_var ) vals = 1 / ((1 + (z / beta) ** 2 * np.sqrt(a * predictive_var + 0.00001)) ** 2) beta_sqrt_p_z = np.sqrt(beta) * zvals *= (1 + (z / beta) ** 2) *predictive_var /( (1+ ( beta_sqrt_p_z / np.sqrt( predictive_var)) ** 2 * predictive_var ) * (1+( beta_sqrt_p_z / np.sqrt( predictive_var)) ** 2)) vals += (1 − beta_sqrt_p_z / np.sqrt( predictive_var)) ** 2 * predictive_var / (1 + ( beta_sqrt_p_z / np.sqrt( predictive_var)) ** 2 * predictive_var) ** 2vals = (1 + (z / beta) ** 2) * vals − (1 − (z / beta) ** 2) * np.exp( − 1) ** 2vals = np.sqrt(a * predictive_var ) * vals / np.sqrt( a * predictive_var + 0.00001) vals *= np.sqrt(np.sqrt(a * predictive_var ) * predictive_var ) vals *= predictive_var ** 2vals [: num_points // 2] = 0 

> return np.argmax (vals)

Figure 19. FEW -SHOT . Python code for αFun BO . The BO performance corresponding to this AF is given in Fig. 5 (right). 

we repeat the evaluation of the AF found for OOD -Bench using the standard BoTorch evaluation pipeline, as demonstrated in the Colab notebooks closed-loop tutorial and custom acquisition tutorial. We adhere to the settings specified in these Colab notebooks, thus we optimize the AF s numerically at each trial, we fit the hyperparameters of the GP model at every trial using L-BFGS-B, and randomly select initial points. For each test function, we ran the algorithm with 10 different random initial designs and plot the results by averaging over the runs for each function in OOD -Bench. Note that we use the exact plot formatting from BoTorch shown in the linked Colabs (which differs from the other plots in the manuscript). Fig. 20 shows how, across all functions, Fun BO performs either comparably or better than EI 

and UCB .22 FunBO: Discovering Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Optimization with FunSearch 

(a) Sphere (b) Styblinski-Tang (c) Weierstrass 

(d) Beale (e) Branin (f) Michalewicz 

(g) Goldstein-Price (h) Hartmann d = 3 (i) Hartmann d = 6 

Figure 20. Performance comparison of Fun BO (green) against EI (orange) and UCB (red) on the test functions for OOD -Bench when using the BoTorch evaluation pipeline where AF s are optimized numerically at each trial, GP hyperparameters are refitted at each trial using L-BFGS-B, and initial points are selected randomly. Results are averaged over 10 runs with different random initial designs for each function. Highlighted areas give ± standard deviation over the random initial designs. 

23