Title: AutoDFT: A Closed-Loop Multi-Agent Framework for Autonomous DFT Calculations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26179v1

Published Time: Wed, 27 May 2026 00:06:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# AutoDFT: A Closed-Loop Multi-Agent Framework for Autonomous DFT Calculations 

Penghui Yang 1∗ Zhonghan Zhang 1∗ Yue Li 1∗ Xinrun Wang 2† Yanchen Deng 1

Yuhao Lu 1 Bijun Tang 1† Zheng Liu 1 Bo An 1†

> 1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2Singapore Management University 

xrwang@smu.edu.sg, bjtang@ntu.edu.sg, boan@ntu.edu.sg 

> ∗

Equal contribution †Corresponding author 

## Abstract 

Density functional theory (DFT) serves as the basis for computational discovery in materials science and chemistry, yet each calculation demands extensive hu-man effort: adjusting algorithms when convergence stalls, revising plans when unexpected physics emerges, and inserting steps as intermediate results reshape the problem. Existing LLM-based agents automate only the initial planning stage, producing a full execution plan upfront and leaving all subsequent adaptation to hand-crafted rules. As a result, these workflows remain fragile, do not generalize well beyond pre-planned scenarios, and often require expert intervention when failures or unexpected intermediate results require changes to the calculation path. Here, we introduce AutoDFT , a closed-loop multi-agent framework that embeds LLM reasoning into every stage of the DFT lifecycle, where a strategic planner produces a skeletal plan of step objectives; a step planner generates numerical parameters just in time from preceding results; and a monitor-recover-reflect cycle diagnoses failures, repairs them, and revises the plan when the evidence justifies it. We demonstrate both breadth and depth: breadth on VASPBench , a purpose-built benchmark spanning 34 tasks and 9 DFT calculation types, where AutoDFT achieves 94.1% task-level success with GPT-5.2; and depth on established materials databases, where AutoDFT produces quantitatively reliable property predictions across electronic, magnetic, and energetic properties. By closing the loop be-tween planning and execution, AutoDFT enables experimentalists without deep computational expertise to obtain reliable first-principles results. 

## 1 Introduction 

Density functional theory (DFT) has been instrumental in predicting properties of materials and molecules from first principles, enabling breakthroughs in areas ranging from energy storage [ 23 ]and semiconductors [ 4 ] to catalysis [ 19 ] and low-dimensional materials [ 17 ]. Despite its central role, practical DFT workflows remain heavily manual. A typical study consists of a sequence of interdependent computational steps, each requiring researchers to choose exchange-correlation functionals, configure numerical parameters (plane-wave cutoff, k-point density, smearing width, etc.), manage convergence criteria, diagnose failures, and interpret intermediate outputs before advancing to the next computational step. This expertise bottleneck prevents truly autonomous computational campaigns, making end-to-end automation difficult. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in scientific reasoning [ 2 ], code generation [ 14 ], and autonomous agent design [ 29 ]. Within computational materials science, LLMs have been applied to property prediction [ 18 ], literature mining [ 5, 9], and preliminary workflow generation [ 7]. However, these efforts automate only the initial planning stage, producing a complete execution plan upfront and delegating all subsequent adaptation to hand-crafted rules. It remains an open challenge to achieve fully autonomous, closed-loop execution       

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.26179v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 25 May 2026 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 012E − E F(eV) -10 -5 0510 15 DOS (state /eV)  ↑ up  ↓ down Total DOS, spin-resolved coarse 5×5×1 ↑coarse 5×5×1 ↓dense 10×10×1 ↑dense 10×10×1 ↓-1.50 -1.25 -1.00 -0.75 -0.50 -0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 E − E F(eV) 0510 15 20 25 DOS total  (states/eV) Zoom near E Fcoarse 5×5×1 dense 10×10×1 Δpeak ≈ -366 meV

c d

> Relaxed Surface Layers Fixed Bulk-like Layers Vacuum Region

CIF File (Crystal Structure) LLM Planner Rule-Based Executor Rule-Based Recovery Results Strategic Planner Rule-Based Executor Monitor & Recovery Step Planner Reflector Adaptive Execution Loop Fixed Execution Loop No Feedback Path 

Generate a plan with all parameters Task Description           

> Compute the local electronic density of states for a clean ferromagnetic Ni(100) surface
> 5-layer Ni(100) slab validated; fixed-cell spin setup required. Keeps the slab fixed as a 2D surface model and saves the charge density for later DOS. Confirms metallic ferro-magnetism, keeps metallic smearing, and schedules
> denser k-point sampling
> for DOS. Regenerates the authorita-tive CHGCAR on the pro-duction k-mesh and sets
> high-resolution DOS parameters .
> Monitor detects the failure,
> terminates the bad run,
> regenerates CHGCAR with a fresh dense-kSCF, and reruns NSCF. Extracts spin-resolved
> d-band centers and con-firms finite Ni-3d DOS at the Fermi level. SCF converges; ferromag-netism and metallic Ni
> d-bands confirmed. Dense-kSCF shifts d-band peaks by ~0.05 eV relative to the coarse mesh. NSCF with ICHARG=11 hits a CHGCAR read or compatibility error. High-resolution NSCF DOS completes; layer spin PDOS obtained.

Events AutoDFT Agent Decision abOpen-Loop (Static Plan) Failure Node 1: Slab Setup Node 2: Spin-Polarized SCF Node 3: SCF Quality Gate Node 4: NSCF DOS Recovery Node 5: Spin PDOS Uses variable-cell relaxation or omits CHGCAR output,      

> causing incompatibility
> downstream. Continues with non-magnetic & coarse settings, missing the need for spin and dense DOS sampling. Reuses the coarse relaxation CHGCAR, producing
> unreliable d-band PDOS. Terminates at the fatal VASP error with no
> recovery path .Never reaches PDOS analysis because the static workflow failed at Node 4. Spin ↑Spin ↓E − E F(eV)

Figure 1: Open-loop vs. closed-loop DFT automation. (a) Comparison of existing open-loop ap-proaches, which fix all parameters at planning time and rely on rule-based execution, with AutoDFT’s closed-loop architecture, which combines hierarchical planning decomposition with LLM-driven monitoring, recovery, and plan revision throughout the calculation. (b) A layer-resolved spin Pro-jected Density of States (PDOS) calculation for a Ni(100) slab illustrating the practical impact of closed-loop execution. A static plan may relax the slab as a bulk-like 3D cell, miss emergent ferromagnetism, reuse an incompatible or under-converged charge density, and fail before reaching the target PDOS. However, AutoDFT can adapt at each stage, ultimately producing a converged layer-resolved spin PDOS. (c) Structure visualization of the five-layer Ni(100) slab. (d) Spin-resolved DOS comparison between coarse and dense k-point meshes, showing a near-Fermi d-band peak shift that motivates k-point refinement before the final PDOS calculation. All VASP-related acronyms, file names, and input tags are expanded in Appendix A.1. of first-principles calculations in which agents not only design high-level workflows but also monitor progress, recover from failures, and revise strategies grounded in physical reasoning. Several factors make this problem particularly difficult. First, even a physically straightforward task, such as bandgap determination, may require a multi-step pipeline (relaxation → static self-consistent field (SCF) calculation → band structure), where each step involves numerous input parameters whose optimal values depend on prior results. Second, DFT calculations fail for diverse physical and numerical reasons, including charge sloshing, unconverged self-consistent cycles, symmetry breaking, and inadequate k-point sampling, and each failure mode demands a distinct recovery strategy that cannot be anticipated at planning time. Third, the optimal workflow for a given material is often not known a priori; emergent properties such as unexpected magnetism or topological character, discovered only during calculation, may necessitate extending or restructuring the plan. Figure 1 provides an overview of the open-loop failure modes addressed by AutoDFT and illustrates how closed-loop execution resolves them in a Ni(100) surface PDOS workflow. We address these challenges with AutoDFT, a closed-loop seven-agent framework built on top of VASP 1 that embeds LLM reasoning into every stage of the DFT lifecycle. The design rests on two core principles: (i) hierarchical planning decomposition, which separates strategic workflow 

1VASP (Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package) [ 12 ] is the most widely used plane-wave DFT code. Its foundational paper ranks among the ten most-cited scientific articles of all time [ 24 ]. Our framework is demonstrated based on VASP, and is adaptable for other DFT software packages, e.g., Quantum ESPRESSO and Gaussian. 

2design from tactical parameter generation; and (ii) closed-loop adaptive execution, in which real-time monitoring, LLM-driven failure recovery, and evidence-based plan revision allow the system to respond to emergent computational and physical findings throughout the calculation. To implement these principles, AutoDFT assigns complementary responsibilities to seven agents: a strategic planner that produces a skeletal plan of step-level objectives; a step planner that generates concrete numerical parameters just in time from preceding results; and a monitor–recover–reflect cycle that runs the VASP job, diagnoses runtime failures, performs repairs, and revises the downstream plans. Our contributions are threefold. First, we propose AutoDFT , a seven-agent architecture for end-to-end DFT workflow automation, whose modular design separates planning, parameter generation, parameter translation, monitoring, recovery, and reflection while supporting 30 material properties across a broad range of common DFT calculation types. Second, we introduce VASPBench , a curated benchmark comprising 34 DFT calculation tasks with ground-truth outputs derived from official VASP documentation, spanning 9 distinct calculation types. Third, we conduct extensive experiments on both VASPBench and the Materials Project database, together with comparisons against rule-based and open-loop baselines, demonstrating that AutoDFT achieves 85.3–94.1% task-level success rates and that closed-loop adaptation provides consistent gains beyond initial LLM planning. 

## 2 Related Work 

Workflow infrastructure for computational materials science. Systems such as AiiDA [ 21 ], FireWorks [ 11 ], and Atomate2 [ 6 ] provide programmatic orchestration of first-principles calculations, and high-throughput frameworks including the Materials Project [ 10 ] and AFLOW [ 3 ] have enabled property screening at scale. These platforms, however, rely on expert-authored, fixed workflow recipes: each supported calculation type requires manual specification of input parameters, con-vergence criteria, and failure-handling rules, leaving no mechanism for adaptive reasoning when confronted with novel materials or unexpected computational behavior. 

LLM-assisted DFT automation. Recent work has begun to apply LLMs to automate DFT workflow generation. VASPilot [ 15 ] and AMLP [ 13 ] employ multi-agent architectures to translate task de-scriptions into VASP input files, automating the planning stage of the computation. In both systems, simulation parameters are derived from library defaults rather than from LLM reasoning conditioned on the material and prior results, and the workflow structure remains fixed throughout execution. DREAMS [26] extends LLM participation to error recovery through a dedicated convergence agent that analyzes input and output files via LLM reasoning to suggest parameter adjustments for failed cal-culations; its supervisor agent can also insert missing computational steps during execution. However, the adaptive behavior of DREAMS operates at the level of numerical convergence: when a calcu-lation fails to converge, the convergence agent diagnoses the issue and proposes solver-parameter adjustments. The system does not re-evaluate the scientific strategy when a step succeeds with unexpected results. These systems demonstrate the value of LLMs for DFT automation while leaving workflow-level adaptation outside the scope of learned reasoning. 

LLM agents for broader scientific automation. Beyond computational materials science, LLM-based agents have been applied to organic synthesis planning [ 2], protein structure prediction orchestration [ 28 ], and autonomous experiment design [ 30 ]. AtomAgents [ 7] employs a multi-agent architecture for alloy design but operates over static workflow templates, and ChemCrow [ 16 ]integrates chemical tools without addressing first-principles calculations. While these systems illustrate the breadth of LLM-driven scientific automation, none of them target the full lifecycle of a DFT computation, from adaptive planning to failure recovery, with closed-loop LLM reasoning. 

Agentic reasoning and tool use. General-purpose agent frameworks such as ReAct [ 29 ], Reflex-ion [ 22 ], and AutoGen [ 27 ] have established patterns for interleaving LLM reasoning with tool invocation. When applied directly to DFT automation, these patterns encounter several structural mismatches: VASP parameters are highly interdependent, making per-parameter trial and error com-binatorially expensive; individual calculation steps can run for hours, violating the rapid-feedback assumption underlying ReAct-style loops; and a numerically converged calculation can still be physi-cally wrong, which cannot be captured by generic success/failure feedback. AutoDFT addresses these challenges through a hierarchical architecture where a step planner generates internally consistent parameters in a single call, a dual-path monitor amortizes LLM cost over long-running jobs, and a step reflector performs domain-specific physical plausibility checks after each successful step. 3Step Planner VASP Executor Dual-Path Monitor Recovery Agent Step Reflector Per-step Loop Fast Rule-based Checks Selective LLM Reasoning Step Plan (VASP Input Files) Next Round If Succeeded If Failed KPOINTS INCAR POSCAR POTCAR ……   

> Strategic Planner Postprocessing Agent Crystal Structure
> （CIF File ）
> Natural-Language Task Description History Skeletal Plan Step 2 Step 1 Step N ……
> If Completed Structured Property Values
> Purely LLM-Driven Hybrid Purely Rule-Based Agent File

Figure 2: Overview of the AutoDFT framework. Given a crystal structure and task description, the Strategic Planner generates a skeletal plan (step objectives without concrete parameters). Execution then enters a per-step loop: the Step Planner materializes standard and task-dependent VASP input files using the accumulated History, the VASP Executor submits the job, and the Dual-Path Monitor tracks convergence. Failed steps enter an inner recovery loop; successful steps are evaluated by the Step Reflector, which may accept the result, redo the step, or revise the skeletal plan (dashed path back to the Strategic Planner). The History store records completed-step inputs, monitor/recovery decisions, convergence traces, and outcome summaries, providing accumulated context for step planning, reflection, and final postprocessing. Module background colors indicate the reasoning paradigm: blue denotes LLM-driven components, pale yellow denotes hybrid components with selective LLM reasoning, and green denotes purely rule-based components. 

## 3 AutoDFT 

A typical DFT study proceeds through a sequence of dependent computation steps, where each step both depends on the outputs of its predecessors and may fail in ways that require expert-level diagnosis. Existing LLM-driven frameworks treat this process as a two-phase pipeline: an LLM generates a complete workflow plan upfront, and a rule-based engine executes it without further reasoning. This open-loop design collapses when a step produces unexpected results (e.g., a relaxation that breaks symmetry, or an SCF that converges to a metallic state for a nominally semiconducting material), because the downstream plan was committed before these outcomes were observed. AutoDFT replaces this open-loop pipeline with a closed-loop architecture organized around two design principles. The first, hierarchical planning decomposition , separates strategic decisions (what sequence of computations to run) from tactical decisions (which VASP parameters to set for each computation). The second, closed-loop adaptive execution , ensures that every computation step is followed by LLM-driven evaluation, so that failures trigger reasoned recovery and successful but unexpected results can trigger mid-workflow re-planning. Figure 2 illustrates the resulting system. Given a crystal structure (CIF file) and a natural-language task description, the Strategic Planner generates a skeletal plan: an ordered sequence of high-level steps with objectives and success criteria, but without concrete VASP parameters. AutoDFT maintains a workflow-level History store that records completed-step inputs, monitor verdicts, recovery attempts, convergence traces, and StepOutcomeSummary records. Execution then enters a per-step loop. For each step, the Step Planner materializes VASP parameters informed by this accumulated History. The VASP Executor prepares input files and submits the job. While the job runs, the Dual-Path Monitor combines fast rule-based checks with selective LLM reasoning to detect convergence issues. If a step fails, the Recovery Agent diagnoses the root cause and generates modified parameters for a retry. If a step succeeds, the Step Reflector evaluates the physical plausibility of the output (for example, checking whether a relaxed structure has preserved its expected symmetry or whether the computed energy falls within a reasonable range) and decides whether to accept the result, redo the step with more stringent settings, or revise the skeletal plan for remaining steps. Upon completion of all steps, a rule-based Postprocessing Agent reads the final History and associated VASP output files 4to extract structured property values. The seven agents span a spectrum from purely LLM-driven (Strategic Planner, Step Planner, Recovery Agent, Step Reflector) through hybrid (Monitor) to purely rule-based (Executor, Postprocessing Agent), allocating LLM reasoning where scientific judgment is required and avoiding it where deterministic logic suffices. 

3.1 Hierarchical Planning 

Generating a complete DFT workflow requires two qualitatively different kinds of reasoning. Strategic reasoning determines the sequence of computations and their interdependencies: a band-structure calculation requires a prior relaxation and static SCF, spin-orbit coupling demands a preceding collinear magnetic ground state, and so on. Tactical reasoning determines the concrete parameters for each computation, such as cutoff energies, k-point densities, and convergence thresholds, and these choices often depend on the outcomes of earlier steps. Conflating the two in a single LLM call, as prior systems do, forces the model to commit to tactical details without the necessary information. 

Strategic Planner. The Strategic Planner receives the crystal structure and the task description. It first converts the structure to VASP input format via vaspkit [ 25 ], then infers material context from the input: dimensionality (2D slab vs. 3D bulk) from the lattice geometry, magnetic character from the elemental composition, and so forth. Based on this context, it generates a SkeletalPlan through a single LLM call. Each entry in the plan specifies a step name, a natural-language objective, a computation type (relaxation, static SCF, etc.), dependencies on prior steps, physical constraints, and success criteria, but no concrete simulation parameters. 

Step Planner. Before each step executes, the Step Planner materializes its concrete VASP parameters. The planner receives the skeletal step specification together with the StepOutcomeSummary records from all completed steps, which contain energy trajectories, convergence profiles, forces, symmetry changes, and any warnings. A single LLM invocation generates the full set of simulation parameters, including numerical settings that control the calculation (INCAR), the reciprocal-space sampling grid (KPOINTS), and any preprocessing actions. When the Step Reflector has requested a redo with specific parameter modifications, those modifications are applied directly rather than being re-generated. This step-level replanning is the core of adaptivity in AutoDFT. Because the Step Planner observes the full execution history at every invocation, it can adjust parameters in response to emergent behavior from earlier steps, which is impossible in an open-loop system where all parameters are fixed at planning time. 

3.2 Closed-Loop Execution 

Once the Step Planner produces concrete parameters, execution enters a cycle of run–monitor–recover– reflect that continues until the step succeeds or retry limits are exhausted. The four components described below are tightly coupled: the VASP Executor launches a job whose runtime output is continuously consumed by the Dual-Path Monitor; a non-C ONTINUE verdict from the monitor triggers the Recovery Agent, which feeds revised parameters back to the VASP Executor; and upon convergence the Step Reflector decides whether the result is physically sound or whether the current step must be revised before the loop advances. 

VASP Executor. The VASP Executor is a deterministic layer that translates StepParameters into a VASP working directory: it writes the input files that specify simulation parameters (INCAR), atomic coordinates (POSCAR), pseudopotentials (POTCAR), and the reciprocal-space sampling grid (KPOINTS), together with any task-dependent auxiliary files for the current step. It then submits the job, and returns file handles to the monitor. It performs no reasoning and incurs no LLM cost. 

Dual-Path Monitor. Runtime monitoring must balance responsiveness against LLM cost: frequent LLM queries become expensive because a single VASP job may run for over 10 hours, even on an H100 GPU. AutoDFT addresses this with a two-level architecture. A rule-based monitor parses the energy-convergence log (OSZICAR) at a fixed check interval of ten minutes, detecting electronic non-convergence, energy oscillation, force stagnation, or error keywords in the detailed output log (OUTCAR). This path handles unambiguous failure modes with zero LLM overhead. A selective LLM monitor is invoked only when the rule path returns a non-C ONTINUE status or at a periodic fallback interval of every five rule-based checks. In practice, a typical relaxation step triggers about 50 rule-based checks over its runtime but only 1–4 LLM monitor calls, reducing LLM invocations by an order of magnitude compared with calling the LLM at every check. When invoked, the LLM receives the last 30 lines of the convergence log, an output summary, the step parameters, and the physical context, and returns a structured decision (C ONTINUE , C ONVERGED , or T ERMINATE ) together with 5a reasoning trace. The selective design retains the ability to detect subtle issues that escape rule-based heuristics, such as slow drift toward a metastable magnetic configuration or gradual loss of symmetry during ionic relaxation, without incurring the latency and token cost of per-check LLM calls. 

Recovery Agent. When the monitor issues a T ERMINATE verdict, the Recovery Agent diagnoses the failure and generates modified parameters for a retry. It receives the failed step’s parameters, the convergence and output logs, the error classification from the monitor, and the history of any prior recovery attempts for the same step, and reasons over this joint context to propose targeted parameter adjustments. The failed working directory is archived before each retry to preserve the diagnostic record. Retries are capped at three per step; if all attempts are exhausted, control passes to the Step Reflector, which may choose to restructure the remaining plan around the unresolvable failure. 

Step Reflector. After a step converges, the Step Reflector evaluates the physical reasonableness of the result. It receives the StepOutcomeSummary together with the current skeletal plan and material context, and returns one of three decisions. A CCEPT advances to the next planned step. R EDO 

repeats the current step with tightened parameters (e.g., a denser reciprocal-space grid or stricter force threshold) while leaving the plan unchanged. M ODIFY revises the skeletal plan itself; the three admissible operations are insert (add a step, e.g., an additional convergence test), drop (remove a step that is no longer justified by the observed results), and replace (substitute a step with a different calculation type). Each operation must satisfy a dependency invariant: every step in the revised plan must have its prerequisite outputs produced by an earlier step. To prevent unbounded plan growth, plan modifications are capped at Rmax = 3 per workflow and total steps at Nmax = 15 ;both values were chosen conservatively based on the observation that the longest manually designed VASP workflows in our benchmark rarely exceed seven steps or require more than two mid-course corrections. A detailed re-planning example is provided in the case study (Appendix E.2). 

3.3 Property Extraction 

Upon completion of all workflow steps, a rule-based Postprocessing Agent extracts structured property values from the VASP output files. Supported properties span electronic (bandgap, band character, density of states), structural (space group, equilibrium volume), magnetic (total and atomic magnetic moments), energetic (total energy, formation energy), and spectroscopic (phonon frequencies, Raman-active modes, dielectric constants) quantities. The complete property coverage is summarized in Appendix A.2. Because property extraction is deterministic parsing of well-defined file formats, it requires no LLM reasoning and operates at negligible cost. 

## 4 Experiments 

We evaluate AutoDFT along three axes: (i) end-to-end task success on a benchmark of realistic VASP workflows, (ii) physical correctness of the properties extracted from successful runs, and (iii) the sources of improvement provided by closed-loop execution. The experiments are designed to test the central claim of this work: closed-loop adaptive execution provides measurable gains over the open-loop planning paradigm adopted by prior DFT automation systems. 

4.1 Experimental Setup VASPBench. We construct VASPBench, a benchmark of 34 DFT tasks derived from the official VASP documentation. Each task provides a target structure and a natural-language calculation objective, and the system receives no additional hints about parameter choices or workflow structure. We evaluate the task-level success rate, defined as the fraction of tasks that produce converged outputs satisfying the benchmark validation checks. The full task composition is reported in Appendix C.1. 

Materials Project subset. To assess physical correctness beyond binary task completion, we evaluate AutoDFT on a 20-material subset from the Materials Project database [ 10 ]. For each material, we compare the electronic bandgap, total magnetic moment, and formation energy against the reference values. We report the mean absolute error (MAE) for each property over successfully completed runs. Details of the subset construction are provided in Appendix C.2. 

Baselines and backbones. We compare AutoDFT-Full , the complete system described in Section 3, with two baselines. Rule-Based executes a hand-crafted workflow template selected from the task description without using an LLM. AutoDFT-OpenLoop uses one initial LLM call to generate the full workflow in advance, followed by deterministic execution, monitoring, and recovery. We instantiate AutoDFT with GPT-5.2 [ 20 ], Claude Sonnet 4.6 [ 1], and Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview [ 8] to test whether the benefits of closed-loop execution are consistent across model families. Details are in Appendix B. 6Table 1: End-to-end success and monetary cost on VASPBench (34 tasks). Tok./task denotes average total LLM tokens per task. GPU cost is estimated at $2 per H100 GPU-hour, following the cost model in Appendix D.2. LLM inference cost is estimated from total token usage using rates of $14/M tokens for GPT-5.2, $15/M tokens for Claude Sonnet 4.6, and $12/M tokens for Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview. Cost/task includes both VASP execution and LLM inference. Cost/succ. denotes total cost divided by the number of successful tasks. In this table, “Sonnet 4.6” is short for “Claude Sonnet 4.6”, and “Gemini 3.1” is short for “Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview”. The best success rate and lowest cost/succ. among LLM-based configurations for each backbone are shown in bold. Backbone Config. Succ. Succ. (%) Tok. / Task GPU-h / Task Cost / Task Cost / Succ. – Rule-Based 23 / 34 67.6 0 46.4 92.9 137.3 GPT-5.2 OpenLoop 28 / 34 82.4 3.9k 22.1 44.2 53.6                                 

> Full 32 / 34 94.1 130k 44.0 92.0 97.7 Sonnet 4.6 OpenLoop 26 / 34 76.5 3.7k 37.2 74.5 97.4 Full 29 / 34 85.3 59k 14.5 30.1 35.2
> Gemini 3.1 OpenLoop 26 / 34 76.5 4.3k 40.3 80.6 105.4 Full 31 / 34 91.2 42k 22.6 45.7 50.1

4.2 VASPBench: End-to-End Task Success 

Table 1 reports both end-to-end success and estimated monetary cost on VASPBench. In addition to task success, we estimate the total cost of each configuration by combining measured VASP execution time with LLM inference cost. VASP execution is priced at $2 per H100 GPU-hour, following the cost model in Appendix D.2, and LLM cost is estimated from total token usage using the official API pricing rates for each backbone, as listed in the table caption. Across all three backbones, AutoDFT-Full improves task success over AutoDFT-OpenLoop. With GPT-5.2, AutoDFT-Full solves 32 of 34 tasks, achieving the highest overall success rate of 94.1%, compared with 82.4% for AutoDFT-OpenLoop and 67.6% for Rule-Based. This improvement comes with higher execution cost than GPT-5.2 OpenLoop, because the closed-loop system triggers additional recovery, reflection, and rerun steps to rescue difficult tasks. Even in this accuracy-oriented regime, GPT-5.2 Full matches Rule-Based in cost while improving success by 26.5 percentage points. For Claude Sonnet 4.6 and Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview, closed-loop execution improves both success and cost efficiency. Sonnet Full improves success from 76.5% to 85.3% while reducing cost/succ. from $97.4 to $35.2. Gemini Full improves success from 76.5% to 91.2% while reducing cost/succ. from $105.4 to $50.1. These results show that the additional LLM reasoning cost can be more than offset by savings in VASP execution time. In particular, closed-loop monitoring and recovery can terminate unpromising runs earlier, repair recoverable failures, and avoid spending GPU time on workflows whose assumptions have already become invalid. Overall, Table 1 suggests that closed-loop execution should not be viewed simply as an added LLM overhead. Instead, it trades relatively inexpensive runtime reasoning for more selective use of expensive first-principles computation. Depending on the backbone, this trade-off either improves both success and monetary cost, as in Claude Sonnet 4.6 and Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview, or prioritizes the highest task success at a cost comparable to the rule-based baseline, as in GPT-5.2. More detailed analysis about execution cost can be found in Appendix D.2. 

4.3 Physical Correctness on Materials Project 

VASPBench evaluates whether a workflow converges and produces validated output files, but task completion alone does not establish that the extracted physical quantities are reliable. We therefore evaluate AutoDFT-Full on a 20-material subset from the Materials Project and compare three com-monly used properties, namely the electronic bandgap, total magnetic moment, and formation energy, against Materials Project PBE reference values. Table 2 reports property-level MAEs over successfully completed runs. AutoDFT-Full achieves high completion rates across the three backbones, with the number of extracted predictions varying by property. GPT-5.2 completes 16 bandgap, 18 magnetic-moment, and 17 formation-energy predictions; Claude Sonnet 4.6 completes 19 predictions for all properties; and Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview completes 7Table 2: Property-level accuracy on the Materials Project subset (20 materials). Values are mean absolute errors against Materials Project PBE reference values, computed only over successfully completed tasks. Lower values are better. n denotes the number of tasks with extracted predictions. Bandgap (eV) Mag. moment ( μB ) Form. energy (eV/atom) Backbone n MAE n MAE n MAE GPT-5.2 16 0.80 18 0.17 17 0.29 

Claude Sonnet 4.6 19 0.26 19 0.49 19 0.32 Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview 20 0.41 19 0.51 19 0.41 20 bandgap predictions and 19 predictions for both magnetic moment and formation energy. Across completed runs, the MAEs range from 0.26 to 0.80 eV for bandgap, from 0.17 to 0.51 μB for magnetic moment, and from 0.29 to 0.41 eV/atom for formation energy. These results provide a complementary validation to VASPBench. The benchmark success rates show that AutoDFT can execute diverse DFT workflows to convergence, while the Materials Project comparison shows that the resulting outputs can be parsed into physically meaningful quantities with reasonable agreement to established reference data. This is important because an automation system that merely produces converged calculations without reliable property extraction would be insufficient for downstream materials discovery. 

4.4 Analysis of Closed-Loop Adaptation 

We next analyze the sources of the closed-loop gains observed in Table 1. We consider two comple-mentary questions: which calculation types benefit most from closed-loop execution, and how often successful AutoDFT-Full runs actually depend on runtime intervention rather than on the initial plan. Static                       

> SCF
> Ionic
> Relax.
> DOS Volume
> Relax.
> Spin-
> Orbit
> Phonon
> DFPT
> Mol.
> Dynamics
> Dielectric
> Optical
> XAS/
> XANES
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Success Rate (%)
> n=17 n=6 n=4 n=3 n=3 n=3 n=2 n=1 n=1
> (a) GPT-5.2: across configurations
> Rule-Based OpenLoop Full
> Static
> SCF
> Ionic
> Relax.
> DOS Volume
> Relax.
> Spin-
> Orbit
> Phonon
> DFPT
> Mol.
> Dynamics
> Dielectric
> Optical
> XAS/
> XANES
> n=17 n=6 n=4 n=3 n=3 n=3 n=2 n=1 n=1
> (b) AutoDFT-Full: across backbones
> GPT-5.2 Claude Sonnet 4.6 Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview

Figure 3: Per-calculation-type success rate on VASPBench (34 tasks). (a) GPT-5.2 backbone across configurations: the closed-loop components provide the largest gains on ionic relaxation, phonon DFPT, and molecular dynamics. (b) AutoDFT-Full across backbones: performance is consistent on most types, with the largest variation on DOS and molecular dynamics. Task counts for each type are shown above the bars. Figure 3 decomposes VASPBench success rates by calculation type. The strongest gains from closed-loop execution occur in multi-stage calculations with nontrivial parameter dependencies. Under GPT-5.2, AutoDFT-Full improves phonon DFPT to 100% success, compared with 0% for Rule-Based and 50% for OpenLoop, and is the only configuration that solves any molecular dynamics task. It also improves ionic relaxation over fixed templates, where the Rule-Based baseline reaches only 50.0%. By contrast, simpler or more template-like tasks, such as spin-orbit coupling, volume relaxation, and X-ray absorption spectroscopy, are already solved reliably by Rule-Based. This pattern suggests that closed-loop adaptation is most valuable when a fixed initial plan cannot specify the workflow. To isolate the role of runtime intervention, we inspect the reasoning traces of successful AutoDFT-Full runs and mark a task as intervention-dependent if it uses LLM-driven recovery, monitor-triggered termination, or reflector-driven plan modification. Table 3 reports this counterfactual analysis across VASPBench and Materials Project (MP)-derived benchmarks. Whereas Figure 3 shows where the largest benchmark-level gains occur, Table 3 measures how often successful runs rely on closed-loop mechanisms during execution. Results show that intervention needs depend on both the backbone model and benchmark. For GPT-5.2, many runs are intervention-dependent across all settings: 862.5% on VASPBench, 62.5% on MP bandgap, 66.7% on MP magnetic moment, and 64.7% on MP formation energy. These high rates indicate that many GPT-5.2 successes cannot be attributed only to the initial plan, but rely on reacting to intermediate failures or questionable states during execution. The pattern differs for stronger initial planners. Claude Sonnet 4.6 generally requires fewer interven-tions, with intervention rates of 24.1% on VASPBench and 5.6%–15.8% on the MP benchmarks. This suggests that a stronger initial plan can reduce the need for runtime correction. However, closed-loop adaptation remains useful even when the initial planner is strong: several successful Sonnet runs still depend on recovery or plan modification. Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview shows a mixed profile. On VASPBench, only 6.5% of its successful tasks require intervention, suggesting that most successes are achieved without runtime modification. On the MP benchmarks, however, intervention-dependent successes account for 35.0%, 21.1%, and 31.6% of successful runs for bandgap, magnetic moment, and formation energy, respectively. Thus, even with a strong initial planner, closed-loop mechanisms still improve robustness, especially across broader materials-property tasks. Taken together, the per-type and intervention analyses show that AutoDFT-Full is not merely bene-fiting from a stronger initial plan. The system gains robustness by detecting failed or questionable intermediate states, revising parameters, terminating unproductive runs, and modifying the workflow when earlier assumptions no longer hold. This mechanism is especially important for phonons, relax-ations, and molecular dynamics, where errors often emerge only after partial execution, and it also contributes to MP-derived property prediction tasks where failures can arise from structure-specific convergence, magnetism, or parameter-selection issues. Additional analysis (including execution cost) is reported in Appendix D, and detailed qualitative examples are provided in Appendix E. Table 3: Counterfactual analysis: fraction of AutoDFT-Full successes that relied on closed-loop intervention, including LLM recovery, monitor termination, or reflector plan modification. “w/o intervention” counts tasks that succeeded without any such intervention; these tasks would plausibly have also succeeded under a simpler architecture. In this table, “Sonnet 4.6” is short for “Claude Sonnet 4.6”, and “Gemini 3.1” is short for “Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview”. Benchmark Backbone Successes w/o intervention Intervention rate VASPBench GPT-5.2 32 12 (37.5%) 62.5% Sonnet 4.6 29 22 (75.9%) 24.1% Gemini 3.1 31 29 (93.5%) 6.5% MP (bandgap) GPT-5.2 16 6 (37.5%) 62.5% Sonnet 4.6 19 17 (89.5%) 10.5% Gemini 3.1 20 13 (65.0%) 35.0% MP (magnetic moment) GPT-5.2 18 6 (33.3%) 66.7% Sonnet 4.6 19 16 (84.2%) 15.8% Gemini 3.1 19 15 (78.9%) 21.1% MP (formation energy) GPT-5.2 17 6 (35.3%) 64.7% Sonnet 4.6 19 18 (94.7%) 5.6% Gemini 3.1 19 13 (68.4%) 31.6% 

## 5 Conclusion 

We present AutoDFT, a multi-agent framework that embeds LLM reasoning into every stage of the DFT lifecycle through hierarchical planning decomposition and closed-loop adaptive execution. AutoDFT coordinates seven specialized agents, ranging from purely LLM-driven to purely rule-based, to couple workflow design with result-conditioned parameterization, execution monitoring, failure recovery, and plan revision under emergent findings. On VASPBench (34 tasks from official VASP documentation), AutoDFT achieves 94.1% success with GPT-5.2, compared to 82.4% for open-loop planning and 67.6% for a rule-based baseline, with consistent gains across three model families. Evaluation on a 20-material Materials Project subset confirms that task completion translates into quantitative property accuracy. Comparisons against rule-based and open-loop baselines show that closed-loop adaptation provides gains across model families, with runtime recovery and plan revision proving most valuable for multi-stage calculations involving complex parameter interdependencies. 9References 

[1] Anthropic. System Card: Claude Sonnet 4.6. Technical report, Anthropic, Feb 2026. [2] Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, Ben Kline, and Gabe Gomes. Autonomous chemical research with large language models. Nature , 2023. [3] Stefano Curtarolo, Wahyu Setyawan, Gus L.W. Hart, Michal Jahnatek, Roman V. Chepulskii, Richard H. Taylor, Shidong Wang, Junkai Xue, Kesong Yang, Ohad Levy, Michael J. Mehl, Harold T. Stokes, Denis O. Demchenko, and Dane Morgan. AFLOW: An automatic framework for high-throughput materials discovery. Computational Materials Science , 2012. [4] Stefano Curtarolo, Gus LW Hart, Marco Buongiorno Nardelli, Natalio Mingo, Stefano Sanvito, and Ohad Levy. The high-throughput highway to computational materials design. Nature Materials , 2013. [5] Luca Foppiano, Guillaume Lambard, Toshiyuki Amagasa, and Masashi Ishii. Mining experi-mental data from materials science literature with large language models: an evaluation study. 

Science and Technology of Advanced Materials: Methods , 2024. [6] Alex M. Ganose, Hrushikesh Sahasrabuddhe, Mark Asta, Kevin Beck, Tathagata Biswas, Alexander Bonkowski, Joana Bustamante, Xin Chen, Yuan Chiang, Daryl C. Chrzan, Jacob Clary, Orion A. Cohen, Christina Ertural, Max C. Gallant, Janine George, Sophie Gerits, Rhys E. A. Goodall, Rishabh D. Guha, Geoffroy Hautier, Matthew Horton, T. J. Inizan, Aaron D. Kaplan, Ryan S. Kingsbury, Matthew C. Kuner, Bryant Li, Xavier Linn, Matthew J. McDermott, Rohith Srinivaas Mohanakrishnan, Aakash A. Naik, Jeffrey B. Neaton, Shehan M. Parmar, Kristin A. Persson, Guido Petretto, Thomas A. R. Purcell, Francesco Ricci, Benjamin Rich, Janosh Riebesell, Gian-Marco Rignanese, Andrew S. Rosen, Matthias Scheffler, Jonathan Schmidt, Jimmy-Xuan Shen, Andrei Sobolev, Ravishankar Sundararaman, Cooper Tezak, Victor Trinquet, Joel B. Varley, Derek Vigil-Fowler, Duo Wang, David Waroquiers, Mingjian Wen, Han Yang, Hui Zheng, Jiongzhi Zheng, Zhuoying Zhu, and Anubhav Jain. Atomate2: modular workflows for materials science. Digital Discovery , 2025. [7] Alireza Ghafarollahi and Markus J. Buehler. Automating alloy design and discovery with physics-aware multimodal multiagent ai. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,2025. [8] Google DeepMind. Gemini 3.1 ProModel Card. Technical report, Google DeepMind, Feb 2026. [9] Jianguo Huang, Yuhao Lu, Yanchen Deng, Chendong Zhao, Penghui Yang, Zhonghan Zhang, Yixuan Li, Yushan Xiao, Cuntai Guan, Bijun Tang, Xinrun Wang, Zheng Liu, and Bo An. Mat-Seek: An automated knowledge-driven framework for materials research. In AI for Accelerated Materials Design Workshop at ICLR 2026 , 2026. [10] Anubhav Jain, Shyue Ping Ong, Geoffroy Hautier, Wei Chen, William Davidson Richards, Stephen Dacek, Shreyas Cholia, Dan Gunter, David Skinner, Gerbrand Ceder, and Kristin A. Persson. Commentary: The materials project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL Materials , 2013. [11] Anubhav Jain, Shyue Ping Ong, Wei Chen, Bharat Medasani, Xiaohui Qu, Michael Kocher, Miriam Brafman, Guido Petretto, Gian-Marco Rignanese, Geoffroy Hautier, Daniel Gunter, and Kristin A. Persson. FireWorks: a dynamic workflow system designed for high-throughput applications. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience , 2015. [12] G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set. Physical Review B , 1996. [13] Adam Lahouari, Jutta Rogal, and Mark E Tuckerman. Automated machine learning pipeline: Large language models-assisted automated data set generation for training machine-learned interatomic potentials. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation , 2025. 10 [14] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level code generation with AlphaCode. Science , 2022. [15] Jiaxuan Liu, Tiannian Zhu, Caiyuan Ye, Zhong Fang, Hongming Weng, and Quansheng Wu. VASPilot: MCP-facilitated multi-agent intelligence for autonomous VASP simulations. Chinese Physics B , 2025. [16] Andres M. Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D White, and Philippe Schwaller. Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools. Nature machine intelli-gence , 2024. [17] Nicolas Mounet, Marco Gibertini, Philippe Schwaller, Davide Campi, Andrius Merkys, Antimo Marrazzo, Thibault Sohier, Ivano Eligio Castelli, Andrea Cepellotti, Giovanni Pizzi, and Nicola Marzari. Two-dimensional materials from high-throughput computational exfoliation of experimentally known compounds. Nature Nanotechnology , 2018. [18] Andre Niyongabo Rubungo, Craig Arnold, Barry P Rand, and Adji Bousso Dieng. LLM-prop: predicting the properties of crystalline materials using large language models. npj Computational Materials , 2025. [19] Jens Kehlet Nørskov, Thomas Bligaard, Jan Rossmeisl, and Claus Hviid Christensen. Towards the computational design of solid catalysts. Nature Chemistry , 2009. [20] OpenAI. Update to GPT-5 System Card: GPT-5.2. Technical report, OpenAI, Dec 2025. [21] Giovanni Pizzi, Andrea Cepellotti, Riccardo Sabatini, Nicola Marzari, and Boris Kozinsky. AiiDA: automated interactive infrastructure and database for computational science. Computa-tional Materials Science , 2016. [22] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Re-flexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [23] Alexander Urban, Dong-Hwa Seo, and Gerbrand Ceder. Computational understanding of Li-ion batteries. npj Computational Materials , 2016. [24] Richard Van Noorden. These are the most-cited research papers of all time. Nature , 2025. [25] Vei Wang, Nan Xu, Jin-Cheng Liu, Gang Tang, and Wen-Tong Geng. VASPKIT: A user-friendly interface facilitating high-throughput computing and analysis using VASP code. Computer Physics Communications , 2021. [26] Ziqi Wang, Hongshuo Huang, Hancheng Zhao, Changwen Xu, Shang Zhu, Jan Janssen, and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan. DREAMS: Density functional theory based research engine for agentic materials simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.14267 , 2025. [27] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. [28] Xiaopeng Xu, Chenjie Feng, Chao Zha, Wenjia He, Maolin He, Bin Xiao, and Xin Gao. ProteinMCP: An agentic ai framework for autonomous protein engineering. Protein Science ,2026. [29] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [30] Lianhao Zhou, Hongyi Ling, Cong Fu, Yepeng Huang, Michael Sun, Wendi Yu, Xiaoxuan Wang, Xiner Li, Xingyu Su, Junkai Zhang, et al. Autonomous agents for scientific discovery: Orchestrating scientists, language, code, and physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09901 , 2025. 11 Appendix 

# Table of Contents 

A Notation and System Scope 13 

A.1 Glossary of DFT, VASP, and Materials-Science Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 A.2 Supported Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

B Workflow and Implementation Details 17 

B.1 Workflow Controller Pseudocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.2 Basic Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.3 Rule-Based Monitor Detection Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.4 Recovery Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 B.5 LLM Prompt Templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

C Benchmark Details 24 

C.1 VASPBench Benchmark Task List . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 C.2 Materials Project 20-Material Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

D Additional Analysis 26 

D.1 Recovery Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 D.2 Execution Cost and Resource Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 

E Qualitative Examples and Limitations 28 

E.1 Example LLM-Generated Skeletal Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 E.2 Case Study: Mott insulator bandgap recovery on NiO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 E.3 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 

12 A Notation and System Scope 

A.1 Glossary of DFT, VASP, and Materials-Science Notation 

To keep the main text concise, we use standard terminology from density-functional theory, VASP, and computational materials science. This appendix summarizes the acronyms, VASP file names, and VASP input tags used throughout the paper. 

A.1.1 General DFT and Materials-Science Acronyms 

Table 4: General DFT and materials-science acronyms used in the paper. Acronym Full name Meaning in this paper SCF Self-Consistent Field Self-consistent electronic calculation; used in static, spin-polarized, and pre-processing steps. NSCF Non-Self-Consistent Field Non-self-consistent calculation, typically performed after an SCF calculation for DOS or band-structure analysis. DOS Density of States Electronic density of states, including total and spin-resolved DOS. PDOS Projected Density of States Density of states projected onto atoms, layers, orbitals, or spin channels. DFPT Density-Functional Perturbation Theory Perturbative DFT method used for phonons, dielectric response, Raman modes, and related properties. SOC Spin-Orbit Coupling Relativistic coupling between spin and orbital degrees of freedom. XAS X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy Spectroscopic calculation type involving X-ray absorption. XANES X-ray Absorption Near-Edge Structure Near-edge region of an X-ray absorption spectrum. PBE Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof Generalized-gradient exchange-correlation functional commonly used in DFT calculations. GGA Generalized Gradient Approximation Class of exchange-correlation functionals that includes PBE. LDA Local Density Approximation Exchange-correlation approximation based on the local electron density. LSDA+ U Local Spin-Density Approximation plus Hubbard U

Spin-polarized local-density approximation augmented with a Hubbard-U correction. DFT+ U Density Functional Theory plus Hubbard U

Hubbard-corrected DFT treatment for localized or strongly correlated electronic states. HF Hartree–Fock Wave-function-based electronic-structure method; also appears in the context of hybrid functionals. HSE Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof Screened hybrid exchange-correlation functional. PBE0 Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof 0 Hybrid exchange-correlation functional based on PBE. GW Green’s-function G and screened-interaction W

approximation Many-body perturbation method for quasiparticle electronic structure. NEB Nudged Elastic Band Method for transition-state and reaction-path calculations. MD Molecular Dynamics Time evolution of atomic configurations. AIMD Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics Molecular dynamics driven by first-principles forces. CIF Crystallographic Information File Standard file format for specifying crystal structures. BZ Brillouin Zone Primitive cell in reciprocal space. VBM Valence Band Maximum Highest occupied valence-band energy. 13 Acronym Full name Meaning in this paper CBM Conduction Band Minimum Lowest unoccupied conduction-band energy. FM Ferromagnetic Magnetic ordering with aligned magnetic moments. AFM Antiferromagnetic Magnetic ordering with oppositely aligned magnetic moments. AFM-II Type-II Antiferromagnetic Ordering A common antiferromagnetic ordering pattern, for example in rocksalt NiO. NM Non-magnetic Calculation or reference state without magnetic ordering. TCI Topological Crystalline Insulator Topological insulating phase protected by crystal symmetry. TMD Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide Layered compound class such as MoSe 2, PtS 2, or HfS 2.

A.1.2 VASP Files and Output Artifacts 

Table 5: VASP input files, output files, and intermediate artifacts referenced in the paper. Notation Full name or description Meaning in this paper INCAR VASP input file for calculation parameters Specifies electronic, ionic, magnetic, convergence, and method-specific settings. KPOINTS VASP input file for reciprocal-space sampling Specifies the k-point mesh or path used in reciprocal-space integration. POSCAR VASP input file for structure Specifies lattice vectors, atomic species, and atomic positions. POTCAR VASP input file for pseudopotentials Contains the pseudopotentials used for each atomic species. OUTCAR VASP main output file Contains detailed runtime information, convergence records, errors, forces, stresses, and final properties. OSZICAR VASP convergence log Compact log of electronic and ionic convergence, parsed by the monitor during execution. CONTCAR VASP relaxed-structure output file Stores the final structure after relaxation and is commonly used to initialize downstream steps. CHGCAR VASP charge-density file Stores the charge density; reused in static, DOS, band-structure, or NSCF calculations when appropriate. WAVECAR VASP wavefunction file Stores wavefunction information for restarting or continuing electronic-structure calculations. DOSCAR VASP density-of-states output file Stores total and, when requested, projected density-of-states data. EIGENVAL VASP eigenvalue output file Stores band eigenvalues and occupancies. PROCAR VASP projected eigenvalue output file Stores orbital, atomic, and spin projections of electronic states. XDATCAR VASP trajectory output file Stores atomic trajectories, especially for molecular-dynamics calculations. IBZKPT VASP irreducible Brillouin-zone 

k-point file Stores the symmetry-reduced k-point set used internally by VASP. LOCPOT VASP local-potential output file Stores the local electrostatic potential, used for quantities such as work functions. ELFCAR VASP electron-localization-function output file Stores the electron localization function when requested. 14 A.1.3 VASP Input Tags Used in Planning, Monitoring, and Recovery 

Table 6: VASP input tags that appear in the workflow design, monitoring, recovery, or prompt templates. Tag Full name or description Meaning in this paper ICHARG Charge-density initialization tag Controls whether VASP initializes, reads, or reuses the charge density, including from CHGCAR. ISTART Wavefunction restart tag Controls whether and how VASP restarts from a WAVECAR file. ISPIN Spin-polarization tag Controls whether the calculation is non-spin-polarized or spin-polarized. MAGMOM Initial magnetic moments Specifies initial magnetic moments for spin-polarized or magnetic calculations. LSORBIT Spin-orbit-coupling switch Enables SOC calculations when set appropriately. ENCUT Plane-wave energy cutoff Controls the kinetic-energy cutoff of the plane-wave basis. PREC Precision setting Controls the numerical precision level used by VASP. ISIF Ionic relaxation and stress-control tag Determines which degrees of freedom are relaxed, such as atomic positions, cell shape, and volume. ISMEAR Smearing-method tag Controls the electronic smearing scheme used for Brillouin-zone integration. SIGMA Smearing width Sets the width of the smearing distribution used with ISMEAR. EDIFF Electronic convergence threshold Sets the stopping criterion for electronic self-consistency. EDIFFG Ionic convergence threshold Sets the stopping criterion for ionic relaxation, typically based on forces or energy changes. NELM Maximum electronic SCF steps Sets the maximum number of electronic iterations allowed in one ionic step. NSW Maximum ionic steps Sets the maximum number of ionic steps for relaxation or molecular dynamics. IBRION Ionic update or perturbation tag Selects the ionic relaxation algorithm, molecular-dynamics mode, or DFPT mode. POTIM Ionic time-step or relaxation parameter Controls the ionic time step in molecular dynamics or the step size in ionic relaxation. ALGO Electronic minimization algorithm Selects the electronic optimization or diagonalization algorithm. LDAU DFT+ U switch Enables Hubbard-U corrections for selected atomic species and orbitals. LDAUU Hubbard-U values Specifies the effective Hubbard-U parameters used in DFT+ U calculations. LMAXMIX Charge-mixing angular-momentum cutoff Controls the maximum angular-momentum channel included in charge-density mixing. LHFCALC Hartree–Fock exchange switch Enables Hartree–Fock exchange, typically for hybrid-functional calculations. METAGGA Meta-GGA functional selector Specifies a meta-GGA exchange-correlation functional when used. LEPSILON Dielectric-response switch Enables calculation of static dielectric tensors and Born effective charges. LREAL Real-space projection tag Controls whether projection operators are evaluated in real space. ISYM Symmetry-control tag Controls the use of symmetry during the calculation. 15 Tag Full name or description Meaning in this paper LCHARG Charge-density output switch Controls whether CHGCAR is written. LWAVE Wavefunction output switch Controls whether WAVECAR is written. 

A.2 Supported Properties 

This appendix summarizes the physical properties currently covered by the system. The supported set includes 30 distinct properties. In addition to the properties listed above, several related targets are explicitly excluded from the current scope: energy above hull, advanced optical excitations beyond the independent-particle response, electronic and ionic transport coefficients, and full phonon dispersions requiring supercell force-constant workflows. Table 7: Supported physical properties and the availability of extraction and evaluation functionality. Property Description Bandgap Electronic bandgap, including direct or indirect character and band-edge information Band structure Electronic bands along a high-symmetry reciprocal-space path Density of states Total and projected electronic density of states Space group Crystallographic space group inferred from a relaxed structure Magnetic moment Total magnetic moment for spin-polarized calculations Heat of formation Formation enthalpy or formation energy per atom Relaxation Structural relaxation or geometry optimization Total energy Ground-state DFT total energy Raman spectra Raman-active vibrational modes and spectra from DFPT calculations Phonons Zone-center phonon frequencies from DFPT calculations Electronic type Carrier-type classification, including n-type, p-type, and intrinsic be-havior Charged defects Charged-defect calculations with electron-count adjustment Thermodynamics Entropy, free energy, heat capacity, and zero-point energy derived from phonons van der Waals correction Dispersion-corrected DFT calculations, including common semi-empirical and many-body schemes Dielectric response Static dielectric tensor and Born effective charges Work function Work function obtained from slab calculations Transition-state search Nudged elastic band calculations for reaction or diffusion barriers Optical dielectric function Frequency-dependent dielectric response, refractive index, and related optical quantities Magnetic ordering compar-ison Comparison of ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, and non-magnetic configurations GW quasiparticles Quasiparticle electronic structure and bandgap calculations Hybrid functionals Electronic-structure calculations using hybrid exchange-correlation functionals DFT+U Hubbard-corrected DFT calculations for correlated materials Spin–orbit coupling Spin–orbit-coupled calculations, including magnetic anisotropy when applicable Surfaces Slab and surface calculations, including vacuum regions and dipole corrections Molecules Isolated atoms or molecules treated in finite simulation cells Adsorption energy Adsorbate binding or adsorption energies from surface calculations Surface energy Surface formation or cleavage energies Molecular dynamics Ab initio molecular dynamics under common thermodynamic ensem-bles Elastic properties Elastic constants and derived mechanical moduli at the workflow level Infrared spectra Infrared-active vibrational modes and spectra from DFPT calculations 16 B Workflow and Implementation Details 

B.1 Workflow Controller Pseudocode Algorithm 1 AutoDFT Workflow Controller 

Require: Crystal structure S, task description T , token budget B

Ensure: Computed properties P, reasoning log L 

> 1:

plan ← StrategicPlanner (S, T ) ▷ Skeletal plan  

> 2:

ctx ← ExecutionContext (plan ) 

> 3:

nrev ← 0 ▷ Plan revision counter  

> 4:

while ctx.step_index < |plan.steps | do  

> 5:

s ← plan.steps[ctx.step_index]  

> 6:

θ ← StepPlanner (s, ctx ) ▷ INCAR/KPOINTS  

> 7:

job ← VASPExecutor.submit (θ) 

> 8:

for kretry = 1 , . . . , K retry do  

> 9:

r ← Monitor.watch (job , ctx ) ▷ Dual-path monitoring  

> 10:

if r. status = CONVERGED then  

> 11:

break  

> 12:

else if r. status = TERMINATE then  

> 13:

θ ← Recovery (θ, r, ctx ) ▷ Modified parameters  

> 14:

job ← VASPExecutor.submit (θ) 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

outcome ← ParseOutputs (job ) 

> 18:

ctx.update (outcome ) 

> 19:

d ← StepReflector (outcome , plan , ctx ) 

> 20:

if d. decision = ACCEPT then  

> 21:

ctx.step_index += 1  

> 22:

else if d. decision = REDO then  

> 23:

continue ▷ Retry same step  

> 24:

else if d. decision = MODIFY PLAN and nrev < R max then  

> 25:

plan ← d. modified_plan  

> 26:

nrev += 1  

> 27:

else  

> 28:

ctx.step_index += 1 ▷ Accept on budget exhaustion  

> 29:

end if  

> 30:

end while  

> 31:

P ← PostprocessingAgent (ctx ) return P, ctx.reasoning_log 

B.2 Basic Implementation Details 

All calculations are run using VASP 6.4.0 compiled with the NVIDIA HPC SDK and FFTW. Each run uses a single NVIDIA H100 GPU. The token budget for each workflow is capped at 200,000 tokens, and runs that exhaust this budget are recorded as failures. The maximum number of recovery attempts per failed step is set to 3. The maximum number of workflow steps is capped at 15 to prevent plan inflation. Each individual VASP step has a wall-clock timeout of 4 hours. Steps exceeding this limit are treated as failures rather than skipped. Each configuration is run once per task. All VASP calculations in this work were performed under a valid institutional VASP license. We do not redistribute VASP binaries, POTCAR files, pseudopotentials, or any other license-restricted VASP assets. The released benchmark contains task specifications, structures, and prompts sufficient to reproduce the benchmark setup, but users are responsible for obtaining and using VASP and any required pseudopotentials under their own licenses. 

B.3 Rule-Based Monitor Detection Rules 

This section summarizes the detection rules used by the rule-based monitoring component. The monitor combines OSZICAR-based heuristics, including electronic divergence, oscillatory relaxation, stagnation, and abnormal physical indicators, with a regular-expression bank applied to OUTCAR to identify explicit VASP error messages. The rules are adapted for density-functional perturbation 17 theory calculations, spin-orbit-coupled calculations, and static calculations, where the interpretation of ionic and electronic progress differs from standard structural relaxations. Table 8: Default monitor configuration. Parameter Default 

nelm_threshold 60 

oscillation_window 10 ionic steps 

stagnation_de_threshold 1 × 10 −4 eV 

stagnation_step_threshold 20 ionic steps 

force_threshold 100.0 eV/Å 

energy_threshold 0.0 eV, used as a positive-energy warning threshold 

check_interval 600 s, corresponding to 10 min 

soc_milestone_interval Every 10 electronic steps, used to reset the timeout counter 

positive_energy_grace_steps 3 ionic steps Table 9: OSZICAR-based heuristic checks. Detection type Trigger condition 

ELECTRONIC_DIVERGENCE The last three consecutive ionic steps each require at least NELM 

electronic steps, with the default threshold set to 60. 

ENERGY_OSCILLATION Within the most recent 10 ionic steps, the number of sign changes in dE is at least 5, and either the net energy change is non-negative or |∆E| is smaller than the average |dE |.

FORCE_STAGNATION At least 16 of the most recent 20 ionic steps have |dE | < 10 −4

eV, while the maximum force remains larger than |EDIFFG |.

POSITIVE_ENERGY The most recent ionic-step energy is positive after the three-step grace period. 

EXTREME_FORCES The maximum force exceeds 100 eV/Å. Table 10: OUTCAR-based error checks. Detection type OUTCAR diagnostic criterion 

WAVECAR_BASIS_CHANGE Detects restart incompatibilities caused by changes in the plane-wave basis associated with the stored WAVECAR. 

ZBRENT_ERROR Detects failures of the ZBRENT line-search procedure during ionic relaxation. 

EDDDAV_ERROR Detects electronic diagonalization failures associated with the EDDDAV solver. 

BRMIX_ERROR Detects severe charge-mixing instabilities during self-consistent-field iterations. 

GRID_ERROR Detects failures associated with FFT grids, real-space grids, or grid-consistency checks. 

PRICEL_ERROR Detects symmetry-cell construction failures or non-integer symmetry-related elements. 

CHGCAR_READ_ERROR Detects charge-density restart failures caused by unreadable or incompatible CHGCAR data. 

MAGMOM_ERROR Detects failures in parsing or validating the magnetic-moment specification. 

HYBRID_ICHARG_CONFLICT Detects incompatible restart settings for hybrid-functional calculations involving Fock exchange and fixed charge-density modes. 

ADDGRID_TS_CONFLICT Detects unsupported combinations of additional grid settings and Tkatchenko–Scheffler dispersion corrections. 18 Detection type OUTCAR diagnostic criterion 

KPOINTS_MODE_CONFLICT Detects incompatible k-point sampling modes, especially conflicts between line-mode paths and calculations requiring uniform meshes. 

NOMEGA_LIMIT Detects cases where the requested number of frequency-grid points exceeds the supported limit. 

SYMPREC_ERROR Detects symmetry-tolerance, lattice-consistency, or symmetry-mapping failures. 

INSUFFICIENT_BANDS Detects cases where the highest electronic band remains occupied, indicating an insufficient number of bands. 

MEMORY_ERROR Detects memory-allocation failures, out-of-memory conditions, or process termination caused by insufficient memory. 

EDDDAV_SUBSPACE_ERROR Detects non-Hermitian subspace-matrix failures during electronic minimization. 

Special-case calculation handling. For density-functional perturbation theory calculations with 

IBRION=7 or IBRION=8 , standard ionic-step monitoring is disabled because the calculation proceeds through symmetry-reduced perturbations rather than ordinary ionic updates. Progress markers of the form “Degree of freedom: N/M ” are instead used to identify new perturbations, and each new perturbation resets the timeout counter. This treatment is used for phonon, Raman, and infrared calculations. For spin-orbit-coupled calculations with LSORBIT=.TRUE. , static calculations may still be computa-tionally expensive because of the spinor basis and the corresponding increase in band count. The monitor tracks the spin-axis direction, resets the timeout counter upon SCF convergence, and also resets it after every soc_milestone_interval electronic steps. When OSZICAR output is empty or delayed, the electronic progress is supplemented using standard output streams. For static calculations with NSW=0 or IBRION=-1 , only electronic SCF progress is monitored. The timeout counter is reset every 20 electronic steps to avoid prematurely terminating long but still progressing calculations. Convergence is detected from the presence of “reached required accuracy” in the trailing portion of OUTCAR. For static calculations, the completion marker “General timing and accounting informa-tions” is also treated as evidence that the calculation has finished normally. These rules correspond to the rule-based monitoring procedure described in the main text and to the failure-detection rules summarized in this appendix. 

B.4 Recovery Procedure 

This section summarizes the recovery protocol used after a failed VASP calculation. The recovery mechanism is designed to preserve diagnostic information from the failed run, construct a structured failure context, and generate a revised calculation setup for the subsequent attempt. Table 11: Default recovery configuration. Configuration field Default setting archive naming pattern attempt_{attempt}_{reason} with timestamp appended maximum retry attempts 3preserve WAVECAR False preserve CHGCAR False restart from CONTCAR True archive all outputs True For each failed calculation, diagnostic and output files are moved to a dedicated archive directory inside the calculation directory. The directory name records the retry index, the detected failure category, and a timestamp. By default, the recovery procedure archives the main VASP output files, including OUTCAR , OSZICAR , CONTCAR , CHGCAR , WAVECAR , vasprun.xml , DOSCAR , EIGENVAL ,19 PROCAR , PCDAT , XDATCAR , IBZKPT , CHG , LOCPOT , and ELFCAR , together with scheduler logs and run reports when present. When full-output archiving is enabled, the corresponding input files, INCAR ,

POSCAR , KPOINTS , and POTCAR , are archived as well. After archiving, the next attempt is initialized using the archived input state, with POSCAR replaced by CONTCAR when restart from the final ionic configuration is enabled. The recovery model receives a structured representation of the failed calculation, including the detected failure category, the suggested recovery intent, the recent electronic-convergence trajectory from OSZICAR , a compact summary of OUTCAR , and the current INCAR and KPOINTS settings. This context is augmented with a domain knowledge excerpt covering common VASP failure modes and parameter-level remedies. The model then proposes a revised calculation setup through a constrained structured output format. The required recovery output contains either a complete replacement of the INCAR settings or a patch-style set of INCAR overrides, and analogously either a complete replacement of the KPOINTS 

settings or a patch-style set of KPOINTS overrides. The output also specifies the requested VASP executable variant, a confidence score, a concise rationale for the proposed changes, and optional information about whether the original calculation plan should be modified. The structured interface is intended to make recovery decisions auditable while preventing unconstrained free-form edits to the calculation inputs. Formally, the recovery output schema includes the following fields: • updated_parameters.incar or incar_overrides ;• updated_parameters.kpoints or kpoints_overrides ;• vasp_version , selected from the supported executable variants; • confidence , a scalar score between 0 and 1; • reasoning_trace , a concise explanation of the recovery decision; • should_modify_plan and plan_revision_note , used when the failed calculation indi-cates that the broader workflow plan should be revised. The revised inputs are validated before the next calculation attempt. Invalid or incomplete recovery outputs are rejected, ensuring that only well-formed parameter updates are applied. The prompt template and output schema used by the recovery model are provided in Appendix B.5. 

B.5 LLM Prompt Templates 

This section reproduces the system and user prompt templates that drive the AutoDFT agents. 

B.5.1 VASP Knowledge Base Constant Used by the Step Planner and Recovery Prompts 

Prompt 1: VASP_KNOWLEDGE_BASE constant.                                                                

> VASP parameter guidance : -Use ‘ ISPIN =2 ’ and explicit ‘ MAGMOM ’ for materials likely containing open - shell transition metals . -For 2 D materials prefer ‘ ISIF =2 ’; for bulk relaxations prefer ‘ ISIF =3 ’. -Metallic systems generally use ‘ ISMEAR =1 or 2 ’; semiconductors use ‘ ISMEAR =0 ’ and small ‘ SIGMA ’. -Difficult convergence can require ‘ ALGO = Normal ’ or ‘ ALGO = All ’ , smaller ‘ POTIM ’ , and conservative mixing . -SOC or non - collinear calculations require ‘ vasp_ncl ’. -Dense k - mesh and tighter ‘ EDIFF ’ belong in static / band / DOS steps , not cheap pre - relaxation .

B.5.2 Strategic Planner 

Prompt 2: Strategic Planner system prompt. 20 You are a DFT workflow strategist . Output JSON only . Produce a skeletal plan : decide step sequence , objectives , constraints , success criteria , and scientific rationale . Do not choose detailed INCAR or KPOINTS values unless they are unavoidable hard constraints . CRITICAL PLANNING CONSTRAINTS : 1. EFFICIENCY : Each step must advance the calculation toward the goal . Do NOT include pure validation , verification , integrity - check , or checkpoint steps that run a VASP calculation solely to confirm outputs are parseable . Sanity checks belong as success_criteria within computation steps , not as separate steps . Target 3 -6 steps for standard tasks ( relaxation , bandgap , DOS , elastic constants ) . Only exceed this for genuinely multi - stage methods ( GW , NEB , DFPT ) . 2. SINGLE - STRUCTURE EXECUTION : The execution engine runs exactly ONE VASP calculation per step . If a workflow requires calculations at multiple structures ( e . g . , EOS fitting with N volume points ) , each volume point must be its own step . When only the equilibrium volume is needed , prefer ISIF =3 variable - cell relaxation over manual EOS fitting -- it is cheaper and sufficient for most purposes . 3. NO REDUNDANT SINGLE - POINTS : Do not add a preliminary single - point calculation before a relaxation just to " establish a baseline " -- the first ionic step of the relaxation already provides this information . COMPUTE BUDGET AWARENESS : - Each VASP step has a hard wall - time limit of 4 hours . If a step cannot realistically finish one ionic iteration ( or one SCF ) within that budget , the whole workflow fails and no result is reported . Plan accordingly . - Relative costs ( rough rule of thumb , ceteris paribus ) : PBE / PBEsol / LDA 1 x ( baseline ) DFT + U ~1 x SOC ( LSORBIT =. TRUE .) ~3 -4 x ( spinor basis ; roughly doubles memory ) meta - GGA ( SCAN , TPSS , MBJ ) ~2 -3 x Hybrid ( HSE , PBE0 , B3LYP ) ~30 -100 x Hybrid + SOC ~100 -300 x GW ~1000 x and up - Concrete implications : * For bandgap tasks : the default is PBE (+ SOC only when heavy elements demand it , e . g . Bi / Pb / Hg / Tl / I / Te in systems where SOC qualitatively changes the gap ) . A three - step workflow ( relax -> SCF -> NSCF band path ) is usually the right answer . * Do NOT tack on " optional " HSE / hybrid / mBJ refinement steps " for higher accuracy " unless the user task explicitly demands it . * If the user task truly requires hybrid - level accuracy , keep the workflow short ( relax - PBE -> HSE - SCF on a coarse k - mesh ) , rather than stacking PBE + SOC + HSE + HSE - SOC on top of each other . 4. CONDITIONAL STEPS ARE USUALLY EXECUTED : the orchestrator does not have a robust " skip if not needed " check for free - form ‘ condition ’ strings , so any step included in the plan should be expected to actually run . Prefer leaving optional refinement steps out of the plan entirely and letting the reflector add them on evidence of need , rather than listing them up front as ‘ condition : " run only if ..." ’. 

Prompt 3: Strategic Planner user prompt template. 

Task : { task_description } Material ID : { material_id } Formula : { formula } Material type : { material_type } Additional context : { additional_context or ’ None ’} POSCAR : { poscar_content } IMPORTANT : Aim for at most 6 steps . Every step must run a meaningful VASP calculation that advances toward the goal . Do not add separate verification , integrity - check , or baseline - confirmation steps . Return JSON with keys : 

21 - task_description - material_formula - material_type - overall_strategy - g lobal_considerations - reasoning_trace - steps : list of objects with step_name , objective , computation_type , depends_on , constraints , success_criteria , priority , condition 

B.5.3 Step Planner 

Prompt 4: Step Planner system prompt. 

You are a VASP step planner . Output JSON only with concrete VASP parameters for one step . Ground decisions in prior step outcomes and the step objective . If uncertainty is high , include fallback parameters and say why . 

Prompt 5: Step Planner user prompt template. 

Knowledge base : { VASP_KNOWLEDGE_BASE } Material context : { material_context as JSON } Current skeletal step : { current_skeletal_step as JSON } Prior outcomes : { formatted prior step outcomes } Prior step inputs ( actual parameters that were written to disk ) : { formatted prior step inputs -- shows only cross - step - sensitive keys : ENCUT , PREC , ISPIN , LSORBIT , LNONCOLLINEAR , LHFCALC , METAGGA , GGA , LDAU , LMAXMIX } CROSS - STEP CONSISTENCY NOTES : - When this step sets ICHARG >= 10 ( e . g . 11 for NSCF band structures , 1for restart ) , it reads the CHGCAR produced by an earlier step . VASP requires the FFT grid to match between the CHGCAR source and the current step , which means ENCUT and PREC must be identical to the source step . If you omit ENCUT or PREC , VASP derives them from POTCAR defaults and the grid may differ , causing " charge density could not be read from file CHGCAR for ICHARG >10". When in doubt , copy ENCUT and PREC verbatim from the SCF step that wrote the CHGCAR . - ISPIN , LSORBIT , LNONCOLLINEAR , LHFCALC , METAGGA , and LDAU / LDAUU must also stay consistent with the CHGCAR / WAVECAR source unless you are deliberately changing the electronic framework -- doing so generally requires a fresh SCF ( ICHARG =2) rather than an NSCF restart . - For non - collinear ( LSORBIT =. TRUE .) steps , a collinear WAVECAR cannot be reused ( spinor basis doubles the coefficients ) . Start from the CHGCAR only ( ISTART =0 , ICHARG =1) unless a prior SOC step produced a compatible WAVECAR . Return JSON with keys : - incar - kpoints - additional_files - vasp_version - reasoning_trace - confidence - fallback_parameters 

22 B.5.4 Reasoning Monitor 

Prompt 6: Reasoning Monitor system prompt. 

You are monitoring a running VASP calculation . Output JSON only . Decide one of : continue , converged , intervene , terminate . Prefer conservative actions and cite the observed convergence behavior . 

Prompt 7: Reasoning Monitor user prompt template. 

Analyze this running calculation state : { monitor_context as JSON -- contains : OSZICAR tail , electronic - history list , elapsed time , current INCAR snapshot } Return JSON with keys : - decision - confidence - reasoning_trace - should_kill - suggested_action 

B.5.5 Reasoning Recovery 

Prompt 8: Reasoning Recovery system prompt. 

You are recovering a failed VASP calculation . Output JSON only . Diagnose the likely cause , propose parameter / file changes , and keep the fix minimal but technically justified . When POSITIVE_ENERGY is reported , reason step by step : 1. What is the electronic structure of this material ? Metal , semiconductor , or insulator ? 2. Check ISMEAR in the current INCAR . ISMEAR =1 or 2 ( Methfessel - Paxton /Fermi ) is designed for metals . Using it on a semiconductor or insulator can produce unphysically large entropy contributions and positive total energies . If the material is NOT a metal , ISMEAR should be 0 ( Gaussian smearing ) with SIGMA <= 0.05 eV . 3. Check for atomic overlaps : are any interatomic distances < 1.5 Angstrom ? If so , the geometry itself is unphysical and must be fixed ( scale or perturb POSCAR ) before changing INCAR . 4. Only after ruling out geometry issues and smearing mismatch should you adjust convergence parameters ( ALGO , AMIX , NELM , etc .) . 

Prompt 9: Reasoning Recovery user prompt template. 

Knowledge base : { VASP_KNOWLEDGE_BASE } Recovery context : { recovery_context as JSON -- contains : failure_reason , suggested_fix , last 30 OSZICAR lines , OUTCAR error excerpt , current INCAR / KPOINTS , attempt number } Return JSON with keys : - updated_parameters : dict with the following fields : - " incar " OR " incar_overrides " ( mutually exclusive , exactly one must be provided ) : - " incar ": full replacement INCAR dict ( non - null , non - empty ) - " incar_overrides ": partial patch dict with only the keys to change Providing both , or neither ( both null / missing ) , is an error . - " kpoints ": full kpoints string / dict , or null to keep unchanged - " kpoints_overrides ": partial kpoints patch , or null ; mutually exclusive with " kpoints " - " vasp_version ": string or null to keep unchanged - " confidence ": float 0 -1 or null 

23 - " additional_files ": dict or null - reasoning_trace : string explaining the diagnosis and fix - should_modify_plan : bool - plan_revision_note : string or null 

B.5.6 Step Reflector 

Prompt 10: Step Reflector system prompt.                         

> You are reflecting on acompleted DFT step . Output JSON only . Decide one of : accept , redo , modify_plan . Judge physical plausibility and whether the downstream plan should change .

Prompt 11: Step Reflector user prompt template.                                                                   

> Reflection context : { reflection_context as JSON --contains : just - completed StepOutcomeSummary , current SkeletalPlan , prior outcomes } Return JSON with keys : -decision : " accept " |" redo " |" modify_plan " -reasoning_trace : string explaining your reasoning -modified_plan : null if decision != " modify_plan "; otherwise aCOMPLETE plan dict with ALL of the following keys ( copy unchanged fields verbatim from current_skeletal_plan ) : {" task_description ": string , " material_formula ": string , " material_type ": string , " overall_strategy ": string , " steps ": [...] , " global_considerations ": [...] , " reasoning_trace ": string , " material_id ": string , " metadata ": {} }-next_step_index : int ( index of next step to execute in the new or current plan )

## C Benchmark Details 

C.1 VASPBench Benchmark Task List 

Table 12: Distribution of calcu-lation types within the 34-task subset. Materials with multiple ground-truth configurations are counted more than once. 

Calculation type Count Static SCF 17 Ionic relaxation 6DOS 4Volume relaxation 3Spin orbit 3Phonon DFPT 3Molecular dynamics 2Dielectric optical 1XAS XANES 1

This section enumerates all 34 systems in the VASPBench evalu-ation subset, along with their stoichiometric composition and the calculation types as recorded in the ground-truth database. The distribution is consistent with the statistics cited in the main text ( n = 17 for static SCF entries, and groups of 2–6 for relaxation, SOC, DFPT, and DOS tasks). The total number of entries is 34. Space-group information is sparsely recorded in the ground-truth database because most entries correspond to molecular, surface, or non-bulk systems. Only three entries have a recorded space group, namely space group 225, Fm ¯3m. Target properties are determined by the corresponding ground-truth calculation type. For example, DOS-type entries are associated with density-of-states targets, whereas static SCF entries provide total energies and band gaps derived from eigenvalue spectra. 24 Table 13: Per-task summary of VASPBench. # Example ID Composition Calculation Type 1 Adsorption of H 2O on TiO 2 Ti 2O5H2 Ionic relaxation, molecular dynamics 2 Alpha-AlF 3 Al 2F6 DOS 3 Alpha-SiO 2 Si 3O6 DOS 4 Bandgap of Si using different DFT+HF methods Si 2 Static SCF 5 Beta-tin Si Si 2 Volume relaxation 6 Calculate U for LSDA+U Ni 16 O16 Static SCF 7 Cd Si relaxation Si 2 Ionic relaxation 8 Cd Si volume relaxation Si 2 Volume relaxation 9 CO CO Ionic relaxation 10 CO partial DOS CO Static SCF 11 CO vibration CO Phonon DFPT 12 Constraining local magnetic moments Fe 2 Static SCF 13 Constraining the local magnetic moments Ni 2O2 Spin orbit 14 Estimation of J magnetic coupling Ni 2O2 Static SCF 15 Fcc Ni Ni Static SCF, DOS 16 Fcc Ni (revisited) Ni Static SCF 17 Fcc Ni DOS Ni Static SCF 18 Fcc Si Si Static SCF 19 Fcc Si DOS Si Static SCF 20 Graphite interlayer distance C4 Volume relaxation 21 H2O H2O Ionic relaxation 22 H2O vibration H2O Phonon DFPT 23 Including the Spin-Orbit Coupling Ni 2O2 Spin orbit 24 Ionic contributions: NaCl NaCl Dielectric optical, phonon DFPT, static SCF 25 Ni(100) surface DOS Ni 5 Static SCF, DOS 26 Ni(111) surface relaxation Ni Ionic relaxation, static SCF 27 NiO LSDA+U Ni 2O2 Static SCF 28 Nucleophile Substitution CH 3Cl -Standard MD CH 3Cl 2 Molecular dynamics 29 O atom O Static SCF 30 O atom spinpolarized O Static SCF 31 O atom spinpolarized low symmetry O Static SCF 32 O dimer O2 Ionic relaxation 33 Spin-orbit coupling in a Ni monolayer Ni Spin orbit 34 XANES in Diamond C128 XAS XANES 

C.2 Materials Project 20-Material Benchmark 

This section documents the curated 20-material Materials Project subset used as the multi-property benchmark. Selection criteria include at most 24 sites per unit cell, four experimental band-gap categories, chemical and physical diversity, and the availability of PBE reference values for band gap, formation energy per atom, and magnetic moment. The final benchmark contains five met-als, five small-gap materials, five medium-gap materials, and five large-gap materials. It spans oxides, chalcogenides, halides, pnictides, intermetallics, Heusler alloys, perovskites, transition-metal dichalcogenides, and fluorides. Three materials have magnetic ground states, namely ferromag-netic MnNi, ferromagnetic GdSb, and antiferromagnetic NiO, while the remaining 17 materials are non-magnetic. The following materials illustrate representative electronic-structure and chemical motifs covered by the benchmark. 25 Table 14: 20-material Materials Project benchmark. mp-id Formula Electronic class Magnetic ordering Magnetic? mp-21075 HfC metal NM ×

mp-11500 MnNi metal FM (4.36 μB ) ✓

mp-510403 GdSb metal FM (7.03 μB ) ✓

mp-1885 AlIr metal NM ×

mp-10910 Al 2Ru metal NM ( ∼ 0) ×

mp-2730 HgTe small gap (SOC) NM ×

mp-1883 SnTe small gap (TCI) NM ×

mp-5967 TiCoSb small gap (half-Heusler) NM ( ∼ 0) ×

mp-762 PtS 2 small gap (TMD) NM ×

mp-1634 MoSe 2 small gap (TMD) NM ×

mp-2490 GaP medium gap (III–V) NM ×

mp-23231 AgBr medium gap (DFT undershoot) NM ×

mp-361 Cu 2O medium gap (cuprite) NM ( ∼ 0.012 ) ×

mp-985829 HfS 2 medium gap (TMD) NM ×

mp-1779 YbTe medium gap (4f) NM ( ∼ 0) ×

mp-19009 NiO large gap (Mott) AFM ✓

mp-856 SnO 2 large gap (rutile) NM ( ∼ 0) ×

mp-3614 KTaO 3 large gap (perovskite) NM ×

mp-2741 CaF 2 large gap (fluorite) NM ×

mp-22939 BiClO large gap (oxyhalide) NM ×

• HgTe (mp-2730) is a narrow-gap semiconductor with band inversion and strong spin-orbit coupling. • SnTe (mp-1883) is a topological crystalline insulator. • TiCoSb (mp-5967) is a half-Heusler thermoelectric compound with three atoms in the primitive cell and space group 216. • PtS 2 (mp-762) is a layered transition-metal dichalcogenide for which semilocal DFT overes-timates the band gap relative to experiment. • AgBr (mp-23231) is a representative case where semilocal DFT substantially underestimates the experimental band gap. • Cu 2O (mp-361) is a cuprite-structure d-electron system with space group 224. • HfS 2 (mp-985829) is a trigonal transition-metal dichalcogenide with space group 164. • YbTe (mp-1779) is an f-electron rocksalt compound. • NiO (mp-19009) is a Mott insulator whose ground state requires antiferromagnetic ordering. • SnO 2 (mp-856) is a rutile-structure oxide with space group 136 and a band gap that is strongly underestimated by semilocal DFT. • KTaO 3 (mp-3614) is a perovskite compound commonly regarded as a ferroelectric parent material. • CaF 2 (mp-2741) is an ionic wide-gap insulator with the fluorite structure. • BiClO (mp-22939) is a layered oxyhalide compound relevant to photocatalysis. 

## D Additional Analysis 

D.1 Recovery Analysis 

The closed-loop architecture routes failed or questionable steps through multiple recovery paths: LLM-driven parameter revision, rule-based fixes for known error signatures, and reflector-initiated plan modification. Table 15 reports recovery statistics for AutoDFT-Full and AutoDFT-OpenLoop on VASPBench. 26 Table 15: Recovery statistics on VASPBench. LLM: LLM-driven recovery attempts; Rule: rule-based recovery; Refl: reflector-initiated plan modifications; Need: attempts requiring recovery; Res: tasks ultimately resolved. Recovery statistics for baselines are reported only for GPT-5.2. Config Backbone LLM Rule Refl Need Res Rate (%) OpenLoop GPT-5.2 0 12 0 6 0 0.0 Rule-Based GPT-5.2 0 23 0 12 1 8.3 Full GPT-5.2 139 15 233 71 31 43.7 Claude Sonnet 4.6 33 0 23 17 9 52.9 Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview 13 0 17 8 5 62.5 Under AutoDFT-Full, GPT-5.2 triggers recovery on 71 evaluated attempts, of which 31 are ultimately brought to convergence, yielding a recovery rate of 43.7%. Claude Sonnet 4.6 and Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview require recovery less frequently (17 and 8 tasks, respectively), but they achieve higher recovery rates (52.9% and 62.5%). Plan modification through the step reflector is the most frequently triggered path, particularly for GPT-5.2, with 233 reflector-initiated modifications. This result confirms that iterative plan revision is a critical mechanism in the closed-loop architecture. In contrast, AutoDFT-OpenLoop lacks LLM-based recovery capabilities, which leads to a recovery rate of 0.0%, highlighting the limitations of fixed recovery heuristics. 

D.2 Execution Cost and Resource Efficiency 

Table 16: Average LLM usage per task on VASPBench. Calls are broken down by agent stage: strategic planner (Plan), step planner (Step), reasoning monitor (Mon), recovery agent (Rec), and step reflector (Refl). OpenLoop uses a single planning call with rule-based execution. Config Backbone Calls Tokens Plan Step Mon Rec Refl OpenLoop GPT-5.2 1.0 3.9k 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Full GPT-5.2 23.2 130k 1.0 10.2 0.3 2.1 9.6 Claude Sonnet 4.6 9.8 59k 1.0 3.9 0.2 0.9 3.7 Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview 8.1 42k 1.0 3.4 0.0 0.4 3.3 Table 17: Aggregate LLM-token and VASP execution cost on VASPBench. We report the number of tasks ( n), successful tasks, total LLM tokens, total GPU-hours, GPU-hours per task, and GPU-hours per successful task. Rule-Based uses no LLM calls. OpenLoop performs a single planning call followed by rule-based execution, while Full performs closed-loop planning, monitoring, recovery, and reflection. Backbone Baseline n Success Tokens GPU h GPU h / task GPT-5.2 Rule-Based 34 23 0 1578.7 46.4 GPT-5.2 OpenLoop 34 28 131.5k 749.8 22.1 GPT-5.2 Full 34 32 9.38M 1,497.7 44.0 Claude Sonnet 4.6 Rule-Based 34 23 0 1,582.8 46.6 Claude Sonnet 4.6 OpenLoop 34 26 125.6k 1,265.4 37.2 Claude Sonnet 4.6 Full 34 29 2.20M 494.4 14.5 Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview Rule-Based 34 23 0 1,566.3 46.1 Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview OpenLoop 34 26 147.7k 1,369.4 40.3 Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview Full 34 31 1.42M 768.5 22.6 A natural concern with closed-loop execution is that it requires additional LLM calls and therefore incurs a higher token cost. However, for VASP-based workflows, LLM usage is only one component of the overall cost: failed or poorly monitored calculations can consume many GPU-hours before reaching a hard timeout. We therefore analyze both LLM-token usage and VASP execution time. 27 Table 16 reports the per-task LLM usage by agent stage, and Table 17 reports the aggregate token and VASP execution cost. As expected, AutoDFT-Full uses substantially more LLM tokens than OpenLoop, since it invokes the step planner, monitor, recovery agent, and reflector during execution. Nevertheless, the additional token cost remains small compared with the cost of the underlying VASP calculations. More importantly, closed-loop monitoring can reduce wasted VASP time by terminating unpromising runs early and triggering recovery before a calculation reaches its hard timeout. This effect is especially pronounced for Claude Sonnet 4.6 and Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview. With Claude Sonnet 4.6, AutoDFT-Full reduces total VASP time from 1,582.8 GPU-hours under Rule-Based execution to 494.4 GPU-hours, while improving success from 24/34 to 29/34. With Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview, AutoDFT-Full similarly reduces total VASP time from 1,566.3 to 768.5 GPU-hours while improving success from 24/34 to 31/34. Thus, for these backbones, closed-loop execution improves both quality and resource efficiency: the extra LLM calls are offset by substantially fewer wasted VASP hours. GPT-5.2 exhibits a different trade-off. AutoDFT-Full achieves the highest success rate, solving 32/34 tasks compared with 23/34 for Rule-Based and 28/34 for OpenLoop, but it also consumes more VASP time. This is likely because GPT-5.2 triggers more recovery iterations and retries, increasing the amount of downstream computation. Overall, these results show that AutoDFT exposes a tunable trade-off between LLM-token cost, VASP-hour cost, and final task success. In favorable regimes, closed-loop execution is not merely more accurate, but also more resource-efficient. 

## E Qualitative Examples and Limitations 

E.1 Example LLM-Generated Skeletal Plan 

This section reproduces a representative LLM-generated SkeletalPlan for the bandgap calcula-tion of NiO (mp-19009, GPT-5.2). The plan encompasses five steps targeting the bandgap of an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator. Fields are reproduced verbatim from the saved output. 

{"task_description": "Compute the electronic band gap of bulk NiO (mp-19009) from VASP calculations, using a physically appropriate magnetic/correlation treatment for this Mott/charge-transfer insulator.", "material_formula": "NiO", "material_type": "3D bulk", "overall_strategy": "Because NiO is strongly correlated and antiferromagnetic, compute the gap using spin-polarized DFT+U in the AFM-II ordering (requires a cell larger than the provided 2-atom primitive). Enforce AFM order by using an AFM-II-capable magnetic cell (>=4 atoms) and robust symmetry-safe settings (ISYM=0 plus tight SYMPREC). First construct/verify an AFM-II-capable magnetic cell with a from-scratch static SCF; then relax the AFM structure under DFT+U; then run a short static AFM-stabilization SCF; finally a high-quality dense-k static calculation to extract the gap from the eigenvalue spectrum. Add a band-structure line-mode run only if k-point locations / direct-vs-indirect character are needed.", "steps": [ {"step_name": "Construct AFM-II cell + magnetism/symmetry sanity check", "objective": "Ensure the calculation cell and input settings can represent AFM-II NiO and will not be symmetrized back to Fm-3m or collapse to a nonmagnetic solution.", "computation_type": "Pre-processing + short VASP single-point (spin-polarized DFT+U) sanity check", "depends_on": [], "constraints": [ "Build an AFM-II-capable cell (at least 4 atoms). Recommended: the 4-atom rhombohedral AFM-II primitive of rocksalt with AFM stacking along [111], or an 8-atom conventional cubic cell with alternating (111) Ni planes. Do not use the 2-atom primitive cell.", "Assign initial MAGMOM with opposite signs on the two Ni sublattices (e.g., +2 and -2 on Ni; ~0 on O). Target ~0 net moment.", "Force a from-scratch spin-polarized start: ISTART=0 and ICHARG=2.", "Disable symmetry explicitly: ISYM=0 with SYMPREC=1e-8.", "Use intended DFT+U on Ni 3d (same U as later steps).", "NSW=0 (no ionic updates); insulator-appropriate smearing (ISMEAR=0 small SIGMA, or ISMEAR=-5)." 

28 ], "success_criteria": [ "Cell contains distinct Ni sublattices with opposite initial moments.", "SCF converges to an AFM-like state: nonzero local Ni moments with opposite signs and ~0 net cell magnetization.", "No restoration to Fm-3m / cubic 2-atom cell." ], "priority": "high", "condition": "Always run first; repeat if any later step reports Fm-3m symmetry or mag ~ 0.0.", "predefined_parameters": null, "metadata": {} }, {"step_name": "AFM-II DFT+U variable-cell relaxation (symmetry-safe)", "objective": "Obtain a relaxed AFM-II ground-state geometry and magnetic configuration for NiO that does not collapse to a higher-symmetry/net-moment solution.", "computation_type": "VASP ionic + cell relaxation (spin-polarized DFT+U)", "depends_on": ["Construct AFM-II cell + magnetism/symmetry sanity check"], "constraints": [ "Start from verified AFM-II cell.", "Initialize opposite Ni moments; target ~0 net magnetization.", "DFT+U on Ni 3d (consistent U).", "ISYM=0; tight SYMPREC.", "Ionic + cell DOFs allowed (variable-cell relaxation).", "Insulator-appropriate occupation/integration.", "Reject convergence if mag ~ 0.0 or net FM moment appears." ], "success_criteria": [ "Electronic SCF stable.", "AFM solution preserved: opposite local Ni moments, ~0 net.", "Forces/stress within tolerances.", "Insulating or near-insulating electronic structure." ], "priority": "high", "condition": "Always run after AFM-II cell verification.", "predefined_parameters": null, "metadata": {} }, {"step_name": "AFM insulating solution stabilization (static SCF, symmetry off)", "objective": "Lock in the intended AFM insulating charge/magnetic state on the relaxed structure so the dense-k run does not revert to a metallic solution.", "computation_type": "VASP static single-point SCF (spin-polarized DFT+U), moderate k-mesh", "depends_on": ["AFM-II DFT+U variable-cell relaxation (symmetry-safe)"], "constraints": [ "Reuse relaxed structure + same XC+U.", "ISYM=0; tight SYMPREC; AFM moments consistent with relaxed sublattices.", "Insulator-appropriate integration.", "Save CHGCAR/WAVECAR for restart." ], "success_criteria": ["Converged AFM SCF (~0 net cell moment)", "Nonzero gap or insulating occupation."], "priority": "high", "condition": "Run after relaxation.", "predefined_parameters": null, "metadata": {} }, {"step_name": "Dense-k static SCF on stabilized AFM structure (gap extraction)", "objective": "Compute well-converged eigenvalues over the BZ and extract the fundamental band gap (VBM/CBM) for the stabilized AFM NiO structure.", "computation_type": "VASP static SCF (DFT+U) with dense k-mesh", "depends_on": ["AFM insulating solution stabilization (static SCF, symmetry off)"], "constraints": [ "Use stabilized AFM structure + same XC+U.", "ISYM=0; tight SYMPREC.", 

29 "Increase k-density vs Steps 1-2.", "Restart from previous CHGCAR/WAVECAR." ], "success_criteria": [ "AFM preserved and converged.", "Non-zero fundamental gap extractable from eigenvalues.", "Gap stable under minor k-mesh refinement." ], "priority": "high", "condition": "Primary deliverable step.", "predefined_parameters": null, "metadata": {} }, {"step_name": "Optional band-structure line-mode (direct/indirect confirmation)", "objective": "Resolve k-point locations of VBM/CBM and confirm direct vs indirect nature.", "computation_type": "VASP NSCF band structure (line-mode) using CHGCAR from previous step", "depends_on": ["Dense-k static SCF on stabilized AFM structure (gap extraction)"], "constraints": [ "Reuse converged CHGCAR; do not re-relax.", "Use high-symmetry path matching the magnetic cell BZ.", "Same DFT+U + magnetic settings." ], "success_criteria": ["Clean NSCF bands along path", "VBM/CBM identified."], "priority": "medium", "condition": "Only run if direct/indirect character or k-extrema are required.", "predefined_parameters": null, "metadata": {} }], "global_considerations": { "magnetism": "NiO requires AFM-II along [111]; the 2-atom cell cannot host AFM-II.", "correlation_method": "DFT+U on Ni 3d (Dudarev-style Ueff). Plain GGA/PBE often gives metallic / too-small-gap state.", "symmetry": "AFM lowers symmetry; safest to disable ISYM (and tighten SYMPREC) so it is not effectively cubic.", "bandgap_extraction": "Dense-k static SCF is primary; line-mode is optional for k-locations.", "spin_convergence": "Initial moments + symmetry-off + tight electronic convergence; verify site-resolved moments, not just total." }, "reasoning_trace": "NiO is a prototypical correlated AFM insulator; a 2-atom cell cannot host AFM-II, and semilocal DFT often fails to open the gap. (0) AFM-II cell sanity-check; (1) relax with DFT+U; (2) stabilize the AFM insulating solution; (3) dense-k static SCF for the gap; (4) optional line-mode bands.", "material_id": "mp-19009", "metadata": {} }

E.2 Case Study: Mott insulator bandgap recovery on NiO 

Here, we present a qualitative case study to illustrate the reasoning behavior that distinguishes closed-loop execution from open-loop planning. NiO (mp-19009) is a prototypical Mott insulator with antiferromagnetic type-II (AFM-II) ordering and an experimental bandgap of 4.0 eV. Computing its bandgap correctly requires (i) constructing a cell that can represent the AFM-II magnetic order, (ii) initializing the MAGMOM with alternating signs on the Ni sites, (iii) applying a Hubbard U

correction, and (iv) suppressing symmetry operations that would collapse the AFM state back to the high-symmetry ferromagnetic or non-magnetic solution. AutoDFT-Full begins with a strategic plan of three steps: AFM-II DFT+U relaxation, dense-k static SCF, and gap extraction. The step planner generates appropriate parameters (ISPIN=2, MAGMOM = 2.0 −2.0 0.0 0.0, LDAUU = 6.2, ISYM = 0), and the first relaxation converges. However, the step 30 reflector detects that the converged solution yields a 0.0 eV bandgap, inconsistent with the expected insulating behavior for this material class. The step reflector issues a redo decision. Over the next several cycles, the system iterates through increasingly targeted strategies: it adjusts the Hubbard U value, enforces NUPDOWN = 0 to constrain the net magnetization, tightens the mixing parameters ( AMIX , BMIX_MAG ) to stabilize the AFM solution, and inserts a dedicated “insulating solution stabilization” step that uses ICHARG = 2 to force a fresh charge density initialization. After several plan modifications and one LLM-driven recovery, the system converges to an AFM-II insulating solution through a seven-step workflow spanning 34 reasoning records. The final calculation produces a non-zero bandgap consistent with the DFT+U reference for NiO. An open-loop system would have reported the initial zero-bandgap result as a converged success, since all VASP output files are formally valid and no runtime error occurred. The physically incorrect result is only detectable through the kind of post-step scientific plausibility check that the step reflector provides. 

E.3 Limitations 

AutoDFT is designed as a general closed-loop framework for automating first-principles workflows, but the present study focuses on VASP-based calculations. This choice allows us to evaluate the framework on a widely used plane-wave DFT code and to leverage well-established input and output conventions, while leaving direct integration with other electronic-structure packages to future work. In addition, our experiments evaluate a curated set of representative VASPBench tasks and a 20-material Materials Project subset rather than an exhaustive coverage of all possible materials, functionals, and calculation settings. The results therefore demonstrate broad coverage across common DFT workflow types, but further evaluation on larger and more specialized workloads would be valuable. AutoDFT also inherits the practical costs of first-principles simulation. Although the additional LLM calls are small relative to the wall-clock cost of VASP calculations in our experiments, the framework is still intended for workflows where DFT itself is an appropriate computational tool. Finally, AutoDFT is not meant to replace expert validation. Instead, it aims to reduce routine manual intervention by combining structured validation, runtime monitoring, recovery, and reflection, while still allowing final scientific conclusions to be checked by domain experts. 31