Title: 29590070

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161v3.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

# A scalable genomic framework for programmable strain tagging in a diverse bacterial genus 

Ezgi Mehmetoğlu Boz 1, Hugo R. Barajas* 1, Tsung-Ta Yu* 1, Mounika Thigulla* 1,2 , Naila Nazir 1,Kyle A. Gervers 1, Sarfaraz Hussain# 1, Lorena Carot Hernández# 1,3 , and Derek S. Lundberg ϕ1.

Affi liations: 

> 1

Department of Plant Biology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 75007 Uppsala, Sweden 

> 2

Crop Biotechnics, KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium 

> 3

Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, 46022 Valencia, Spain 

*,# = equal contribution 

ϕ Corresponding author  derek.lundberg@slu.se  (D.S.L.) 

# Abstract 

Transposons are a convenient vehicle for inserting DNA into a bacterial genome, but widely-used transposons such as Tn7, Tn5, and Mariner do not hit custom targets. Recently, CRISPR-associated transposons (CASTs) have been developed as tools to direct the insertion of a transposon to a chosen site with a short guide sequence. We adapted this system for use in the widespread plant-associated genus Sphingomonas, uniquely tagging genetically diverse strains in several different sites, and we demonstrate the utility of the tags for quantitative strain tracking in complex bacterial populations. Although we initially targeted the conserved site into which Tn7 integrates as a benign transposition location, a genomics search revealed insertions at this site would frequently disrupt genes not only in Sphingomonas but also in widely studied Pseudomonas. Therefore we identi fi ed improved genus-wide conserved sites between convergently terminating genes as alternatives. We experimentally validated an improved neutral site in Sphingomonas, and then targeted this site in a heterogeneous uncharacterized Sphingomonas population. Using a tagIM seq, a novel rapid transposon mapping method introduced here, we screened resulting transformant colonies for off-target transposon insertions. This enabled prioritization of correctly tagged novel strains, accelerating the creation of fully tagged synthetic communities for the high-throughput study of  fi ne-scale bacterial natural variation. 

1

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

# Introduction 

To study an organism in its environment, one must avoid mistaking similar “look-alikes” for the organism of interest. Yet, distinguishing one organism from another can be challenging, especially for bacteria that often grow in complex, heterogenous communities. While bacteria can sometimes be identi fi ed using DNA sequencing, innate genetic differences are not helpful when individuals are genetically very similar or even identical to others in the population. Consequently, experiments relying on innate genetic differences must be carefully controlled to avoid external contamination, and all bacteria used in such experiments should be 

distinguishable from each other. This limits community size and environmental complexity  [1] .

As an alternative to detecting subtle innate features, a common approach is to modify bacteria with a unique element such as a  fl uorescent protein, an antibiotic resistance marker, and/or a unique DNA sequence that serves as a barcode. This approach of “tagging” bacteria, particularly through the use of antibiotic resistance and  fl uorescence, has been integral to the 

study of host-microbe interactions  [2–4] , and has allowed detailed characterization of individual 

genotypes in complex environments. While unique antibiotic resistances and  fl uorescence 

proteins are limited in variety  [5] , DNA barcodes can distinguish myriad individuals when 

detected and quanti fi ed by modern high-throughput sequencing methods, enabling the rigorous study of increasingly multipartite interorganismal interactions. 

A major challenge for all tagging strategies is physically introducing the tags. Although genetic 

modi fi cation of some organisms like E.coli has become very ef fi cient  [6] , the tools available to 

insert DNA into non-model organisms are more limited. Transposons are an especially attractive tool because they retain function in diverse bacteria without needing to be customized for each individual. Further, they can carry large payloads involving thousands of base pairs, and can integrate into the chromosome, making them less transient than broad host 

range plasmids which can be lost  [7–9] . In particular, the Tn7 transposon is popular for 

high-throughput tagging strategies  [7,8,10]  because of its broad host range in Gram-negative 

bacteria and predictable recognition of the chromosomal attTn7 locus leading to insertion just downstream of the Glutamine--fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase ( glmS) gene. In most 

cases, Tn7 integrations are not associated with  fi tness penalties  [8,11] .

Like Tn7, CRISPR RNA-guided integrases, including the type I-F Vibrio cholerae 

CRISPR-associated transposons ( VchCAST) Tn6677-like elements  [9,12] , are functional in 

diverse bacteria. Unlike Tn7, they have the major advantage that the integration site can be programmed using a guide RNA comprising a 5’ CN PAM site immediately followed by a 32 bp sequence, with the transposon usually integrating ~50 bp downstream of the guide sequence. With CASTs, it therefore possible to not only insert a transposon into an intergenic neutral site, but also to target and disrupt genes. In this work, we adapted a single vector VchCAST system 

[9]  for broad use in diverse strains of the widespread plant-associated bacteria Sphingomonas, 

ubiquitous Gram-negative Alphaproteobacteria that often grow in highly heterogeneous 

2

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

communities, and which are of interest for bene fi cial features including plant growth 

promotion, xenobiotic degradation, and industrial production of extracellular polymers  [13–16] .

We created a minimalist tagging construct including both conserved 16S rRNA gene (hereafter rDNA) priming sites and unique priming sites to amplify the DNA barcodes, and used genomic methods to identify conserved locations for versatile guide sequences that would enable targeting multiple diverse isolates. We then tagged  fi ve Sphingomonas strains in at least two genomic locations, revealing by extensive characterization of these insertions the  fl exibilities and limitations of the system. In controlled experiments with synthetic and wild communities, we validated the tags for quantitative strain tracking along with the background microbiota in a complex host-associated environment, identifying tag-speci fi c ampli fi cation biases and an empirical method for determining correction factors. Importantly, our genus-wide analyses suggest that site into which Tn7 integrates is not only unlikely to be a safe integration site in many Sphingomonas strains, but also in other widely-studied bacteria including Pseudomonas. As an alternative to the Tn7 insertion location, we identify improved highly conserved sites for benign transposon integration in both Sphingomonas and Pseudomonas, and successfully target one such site in Sphingomonas. Further taking advantage of its conservation, we designed a tandem array of three related guide RNAs to broadly target this site and used the array to directly transform a heterogenous and uncharacterized Sphingomonas population. Using tagIMseq, a novel rapid method for transposon mapping we introduce here, we identi fi ed colonies of previously uncharacterized strains that were correctly and uniquely barcoded, representing a shortcut that can be exploited to introduce unique DNA barcodes into large diverse populations for large-scale experiments investigating natural bacterial genetic variation. 

# Results 

Design of a minimalist mutation and tagging construct 

We designed a DNA barcoding construct ( Fig 1A , Supplementary Fig 1 ) for the smallest footprint and lowest metabolic cost. As an antibiotic resistance marker necessary for ef fi cient selection of transformed cells, we chose tetracycline resistance regulated by the native tetR 

repressor  [17] . This system is broadly effective in Sphingomonas  [18]  including in strains from 

our collection, and importantly resistance is not actively transcribed in the absence of 

tetracycline and is therefore off in most experimental settings  [19] . We  fl anked the tetracycline 

resistance gene with  fl ippase ( frt) sites that would allow it to be fully excised if desired, and did not include  fl uorescence proteins or any other constitutively expressed genes because these have limited uniqueness and may add metabolic costs. Downstream of the tetracycline resistance cassette we included two rrnB rho-independent transcriptional terminators to prevent transcription beyond the insertion. Following the terminator region is a unique 16 bp random sequence serving as a DNA barcode. The terminator and barcode are  fl anked by PCR priming sites, including not only unique priming sites but also the common 16S rRNA gene 

3

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

(rDNA) priming sites 515F and 799R/806R that amplify variable region 4 (V4)  [20] . The full 

ampli fi able region is ~300 bp, nearly identical in length to actual bacterial V4 16S rDNA amplicons and long enough to be puri fi ed ef fi ciently with Solid Phase Reversible 

Immobilization (SPRI) beads. We modi fi ed the pSPIN pSL1142 vector from  [9]  to include this 

barcoding construct on the transposon ( Methods ), and further modi fi ed the vector backbone to include a dominant negative synthetic rpsL gene that could confer streptomycin sensitivity, and thus be used for negative selection in Sphingomonas which are broadly naturally resistant to 

streptomycin  [18] . The  fi nal vector library, loaded with random barcodes, we named pSPIN-LL. 

Site-speci fi c integration in diverse Sphingomonas strains 

We chose 8 Sphingomonas strains from our sequenced culture collection that represented diverse lineages ( Fig 1C-E ) to gauge broad applicability in the genus, and prepared to transform each in both a neutral location and within a coding sequence ( Fig 1B ). For the neutral location, we initially reasoned that the Tn7 integration site about 25 bp downstream of the glmS stop codon would be ideal, as it is widely used and negative  fi tness effects are rarely reported. Since VchCASTs insert around 50 bp downstream of the guide sequence, we only considered guide sequences within the  fi nal 75 bp of glmS, which should all lead to insertions after the stop codon. We looked for a site with minimal variation between all strains in our collection so that each guide would have utility in multiple strains, and identi fi ed six sites in the alignment that had 5’-CN-3’ PAM motifs in at least 97% of strains. For each candidate site, we asked which fraction of our culture collection could be targeted with a limited number of guides, and discovered that a family of 10 guides would cover about 40% of the collection assuming perfect matches, and around 90% if allowing for 3 mismatches ( Fig 1F ). Initially we assumed perfect matches may be important, and arbitrarily chose one of the guide families with which to proceed ( Fig 1F , dotted line). We then checked that each guide in that family was unique within its target genome ( Fig 1G ). Due to a serendipitous error discovered later, the guide we designed for SphUPP:SBL2-17 differed from its actual genomic target by 5 bp ( Fig 1G, Supplementary Fig 2 ). 

As a coding sequence to disrupt, we targeted the phytoene desaturase ( crtI) gene ( Fig 1B ), which is a critical upstream step in the production of the carotenoids that give Sphingomonas 

their vivid yellow and orange colors  [21] . Mutations in crtI provide a clear white colony 

phenotype that allows successful mutagenesis to be assessed without molecular methods  [18] .

We targeted conserved PAM sites in the  fi rst 100 bp of the coding sequence and found  fi ve sites conserved in 97% of strains. A family of ten guides could target over 60% of the collection assuming perfect matches, and up to 100% allowing for 3 mismatches ( Fig 1F ). As with glmS, we chose a guide family and con fi rmed its uniqueness within each target genome ( Fig 1G ). For crtI also, the guide for SphUPP:SBL2-17 differed from its actual genomic target ( Fig 1G ,

Supplementary Fig 2 ). 

4

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

Figure 1. Design and planning of mutation constructs 

A) Design of transposon payload for pSPIN-LL. frt,  fl ippase sites; tetR, tetracycline resistance; uniq., unique priming sites; 16S, 16S rDNA priming sites; N, random nucleotides; term., terminators. Arrows represent the direction of primer extension during PCR. B) Diagram indicating targeted region for benign genome tagging (top, glmS) and for gene disruption (bottom, crtI). C) 

Unrooted phylogenetic tree of 138 nonredundant Sphingomonas genomes, with positions of transformed strains indicated by a red dot. D) Comparison of nucleotide identity in the V4 16S rDNA sequences of the transformed strains. E) Comparison of MASH distance between whole genome sequences of the transformed strains. F) Percentage of strains from our culture collection (y-axis) that can in principle be cumulatively targeted by a family of up to 20 guide sequences (x-axis). Each grey or blue line represents a family of 20 sequence-related guides derived from a single conserved PAM site, with grey lines representing the case of perfect alignment to the culture collection, and blue lines allowing for alignments with up to 3 mismatches. The dotted line represents the guide family used in experiments. G) Sequence similarity of off-target regions in each genome to the guide sequence designed for that genome as determined via BOWTIE2 alignment. Circles are plotted to represent discrete off-target events only for the most similar off-targets. 

We synthesized all chosen guides ( Supplementary Table 1 and 2 ), ligated each into pSPIN-LL, and then conjugated pSPIN-LL into the appropriate Sphingomonas ( Methods ). We then plated on tetracycline plus streptomycin to select for transformants that had lost the pSPIN-LL plasmid. For both glmS and crtI mutants, we performed two colony PCRs: one to verify that the barcoded tagging construct was present, and a second to verify that the pSPIN-LL plasmid 

5

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

could not be detected. We recovered at least one transformant in all 8 strains, demonstrating that integration is broadly possible in the genus. For subsequent analysis, we decided to focus on those  fi ve strains for which we recovered integrations resulting from both crtI and glmS guides. We attempted to map the insertion site(s) using transposon site insertion sequencing, but this was initially unsuccessful due to factors we subsequently optimized (see below), so for expediency we selected a single candidate colony from each transformation and determined the transposon’s exact location and barcode sequence using pooled whole genome sequencing with long reads ( Supplementary Table 3 , Fig 2A-B ). 

For all ten insertions, the transposon was present as a single insertion in the forward orientation (Supplementary Fig 1 ). For the  fi ve crtI mutants, the insertion occurred in the coding sequence and all transformants had lost their pigment ( Fig 2C ). For three of the glmS-targeting strains, the insertion occurred fewer than 200 bp downstream of the guide, while in the other two the insertion occurred thousands of bases away ( Fig 2A ). In SphATUE:S127H113, transposition created a deletion of 700 bp such that the  fi nal bases of the next ORF were eliminated ( Fig 2A ). Remarkably, both the glmS and crtI-targeting insertions in SphUPP: SBL2-17 were within 100 bp of their target despite the 5 or 4 respective mismatches in the guide, demonstrating that 85% nucleotide identity is suf fi cient if the target is unique! 

Fitness of tagged strains relative to untagged counterparts 

While mapping the insertions, we increasingly questioned whether the Tn7 insertion site was a safe choice in Sphingomonas. Ideally, the transposon should insert between two convergently terminating genes in a region free of annotated features to avoid disrupting operons or regulatory elements, but in only three of our  fi ve transformed strains was glmS convergently terminating with the next gene ( Fig 2A ), with only 12 bp before the next predicted open reading frame (ORF) in the case of SphUPP:SBL2-17, offering an extremely short target. For the other two strains, the gene following glmS was co-directional and within 60 bp of the glmS stop codon, such that any insertion in the glmS 3’ UTR would likely interfere with its transcription. Only SphATUE:S127H113 represented an ideal genetic architecture, with a convergently terminating ORF 697 bp downstream of glmS. 

The  fi tness consequences of the crtI mutations are beyond the scope of this study. To determine if our glmS-targeting insertions were phenotypically neutral, we focused on S. melonis FR1, SphUPP:SBL2-17, and SphATUE:S127H113 because these had insertions immediately downstream of glmS, though we note that for none of our strains was the insertion free of potential consequences for the downstream coding sequences ( Fig 2A ). We performed competition assays by mixing each tagged strain with its untagged wildtype version in a 1:1 ratio and growing the mixture on 2 week old A. thaliana rosettes, with a harvest after one week (Methods ). We then determined if the ratio of the strains changed as a result of the competition, which would indicate a  fi tness difference. In a  fi rst experiment, we used qPCR to detect the ratio and detected no  fi tness defects in S. melonis FR1 ( glmS::Tn), but we were not satis fi ed with the signal to noise ratio ( Supplementary Fig 3 ). In a repeat experiment with 

6

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

additional replicates, we counted colony-forming units (CFUs) from each plant sample plated on two media and calculated the ratio of tagged strains (growing on streptomycin and tetracycline) to total bacteria (growing on streptomycin). This revealed a  fi tness disadvantage in SphUPP:SBL2-17 ( glms::Tn) and SphUPP:S127H113 ( glms::Tn) ( Supplementary Fig 3 and 

Supplementary Discussion ). 

Figure 2. Tagging construct insertion locations 

A) Diagram of mapped transposon insertions resulting from guides targeting the region downstream of glmS. The thin vertical line intersecting all rows represents the expected insertion location 50 bp downstream of the guide. while the red vertical line within each row represents the observed location. The calculated distance in base pairs between the observed and expected location is indicated by an integer. The grey box for SphATUE:S127H113 ( glmS:Tn) represents deleted bases. CDS, coding sequence. B) 

Same as (A), for insertions in crtI. C) The glmS-targeting and crtI-targeting (pale color) transformants from each strain. 

Suitability of tags for amplicon-based quanti fi cation 

DNA barcodes should be reproducibly quanti fi able by amplicon sequencing over a wide dynamic range. To test ours, we conducted independent trials with unique transposon-speci fi cprimers as well as V4 16S rDNA primers that not only ampli fi ed our construct ( Fig 1A ) but also each strains’ native 16S rDNA gene. We  fi rst mixed DNA from the 10 glmS- or crtI tagged strains in a balanced, equimolar ratio, and then created a stepwise linear mix and a stepwise exponential mix by manipulating the volume of each DNA stock relative to what was added to the balanced mix ( Fig 3A ). Despite careful measurement, the balanced mix had slightly uneven abundances of the 10 barcodes, and the underrepresented barcodes were consequently 

7

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

underrepresented in the derivative linear and exponential mixes as well. These patterns were captured by both primer sets, for which relative abundances across all mixes was highly correlated ( Fig 3A-B ). We con fi rmed that both primer sets also accurately captured the expected linear and exponential adjustments; we multiplied the observed balanced abundances by the linear or exponential factors to calculate expected relative abundances in each altered mix, and saw a high correlation with the observed abundances (R 2=0.96 and R2=0.99 respectively, Fig 3C-D ). 

Our inclusion of V4 16S rDNA priming sites on the tagging construct enables a single 16S rDNA primer pair to detect tagged bacteria and uncharacterized bacteria in a complex sample. However, to be able to compare DNA barcode abundances to 16S rDNA abundances, or to each other, it is important to know how ef fi ciently each DNA barcode is ampli fi ed, and how much 16S rDNA signal each tagged strain contributes. We therefore used 16S rDNA primers to sequence amplicons made individually from genomic DNA of each barcoded isolate ( Fig 3E ). Importantly, the sequence to which the 16S rDNA primers anneal is identical in the native rDNA in all  fi ve of our strains, and in our tagging construct as well, so primer annealing should not be a source of bias. After correcting for 16S rDNA copy number in the resulting sequence counts by dividing the 16S rDNA signal by the known number of 16S rDNA copies derived from each genome sequence, it became clear that some variability in barcode ampli fi cation existed between barcodes, including between different barcodes within the same strain ( Fig 3F ). Notably, barcodes for S.melonis FR1 ( crtI::Tn) and Sph-ATUE:S237H113 ( glmS::Tn) showed the lowest ampli fi cation ef fi ciency relative to native 16S rDNA ( Fig 3F ), providing a likely explanation also for their underrepresentation in the balanced mix ( Fig 3A ). For each barcode, we then calculated a correction factor by dividing the copy number-normalized 16S rDNA abundance by the mean barcode abundance ( Fig 3F ). Multiplying barcode abundances by the correction factor thus scaled up poorly ampli fi ed barcodes and scaled down overly ef fi cient barcodes, such that barcode abundances better re fl ect strain abundances. 

Quanti fi cation of tagged strains in complex environments 

For validation of our tagging constructs in a complex environment, we inoculated our glmS-targeting tagged strains as a synthetic community on non-sterile Arabidopsis thaliana plants. For technical reasons, we decided to also include SphATUE:S136H113 (Tn) and SphATUE:S237H113 (Tn), for which the glmS-targeting insertions were considerably off-target. In addition to inoculating the  fi ve strains (Mix5), we also created an inoculum of Mix5 combined with a complex uncharacterized community cultured from river water that was enriched for Sphingomonas (WaterCom, Methods , Fig 4A ). Interestingly, SphATUE:S136H113 (Tn) was dominant in the Mix5 inoculum, despite the strains having been carefully mixed at equal OD 600 ,suggesting this strain may absorb less light at 600 nm, perhaps due to smaller cell size. 

8

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

Figure 3. Quantitative validation using DNA mixtures 

A) Relative barcode abundances (RA) in balanced (B), linearly (L), and exponential (E) mixtures of the 10 tagged strains (colors at right), ampli fi ed with either 16S rDNA (16S) or construct-speci fi cprimers (Uniq). Each stack of 10 black bars shows strain contributions. B) Pearson correlation between barcode abundances measured with 16S rDNA vs. unique primer across all mixes. C) 

Comparison of relative abundances in the linear mix to predicted values obtained after applying the linear multiplication factors to the balanced mix (Cartoon left, correlation right). D) Same as (C) for the exponential mix. E) Left: Relative abundances of total 16S rDNA amplicons (grey) and barcode amplicons generated with 16S rDNA primers for the three mixes and individually-ampli fi ed strains. Genome-derived 16S rDNA copy number shown below. F) Same as (E) after correcting for 16S rDNA copy number. The red dotted line (50%) indicates the expected barcode abundance assuming equal ampli fi cation ef fi ciency to that of 16S rDNA. The correction factors shown rescale barcode abundances to this expectation. 

9

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

The high density with which we inoculated plants led to an initial bacterial load that was several fold higher than the ultimate sustainable load that we detected after 7 days ( Fig 4B) . The load of the barcoded strains alone also stabilized to a similar  fi nal level, regardless of the presence of the WaterCom ( Fig 4C) . While some bacterial families changed in abundance from day 0 to day 7, particularly Enterobacteriaceae which were highly enriched at day 7 in WaterCom-inoculated samples ( Fig 4A ), our barcoded Sphingomonas maintained a similar fraction of the community. Moreover, the relative abundance of the barcoded strains among each other was essentially unchanged ( Fig 4D ), suggesting each had similar survival and growth rates in the phyllosphere. Importantly, the 16S rDNA sequences contributed by our tagged strains were present both on uninoculated plants and on plants inoculated only with the WaterCom ( Fig 4A) , and therefore would have hidden the true abundance of our strains had they not been tagged. 

Although three of the  fi ve strains in the inoculum shared the same 16S rDNA sequence ( Fig 1D ), S. melonis FR1 and SphATUE:S136H113 had unique 16S rDNA, allowing us to again calculate the 16S-to-tag ratio for those strains in the Mix5 inoculum, as we did for individual strains in Fig 3F . The ratio we detected this time, especially for S. melonis FR1, was considerably different ( Supplementary Fig 4 ), likely a result of replication-associated gene 

dosage  [22] . Unlike the stationary phase cultures used in Fig 3 , the Mix5 inoculum was 

prepared from bacteria in mid log phase, which may have led to increased rDNA copies. Since replication-associated gene dosage is minimized in stationary phase cultures, the barcode ampli fi cation ef fi ciencies as calculated in Fig 3F likely more closely re fl ect the true situation. However, to rigorously investigate DNA barcode ampli fi cation differences, we developed a 

hamPCR  [23]  method to compare the abundance of the immediately proximal tetracycline 

resistance region of the tagging construct to the abundance of the DNA barcode of the same construct ( Supplementary Fig 5 ). This “Tet-to-tag” ratio in genomic DNA is always 1:1. Brie fl y, hamPCR uses template-speci fi c primers for only two PCR cycles to add universal overhangs to two sequence-unrelated templates, removes those primers, and completes the remainder of the exponential PCR with a single pair of primers that anneals to the universal overhangs. This removes primer bias during ampli fi cation and preserves the original ratio between the templates, unless those templates amplify differently due to sequence-intrinsic features. These analyses provide support for the barcode correction factors calculated against 16S rDNA in Fig 3F (Supplementary Fig 5 and 6 ), and we therefore used these values to scale barcode abundances in Fig 4 . We note, however, that calculating barcode-speci fi c correction factors from sequence counts of such hamPCR amplicons, rather than from 16S rDNA-primed amplicons, would be preferable moving forward, as it would not be in fl uenced by replication-associated gene dosage. 

10 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

Figure 4. Tagged Sphingomonas colonization of plants 

A) Relative abundances of 16S rDNA amplicons, including both barcodes of the tagging construct and 16S rDNA sequences, for different inoculum conditions. These included an balanced mix of only the barcoded strains (Mix5), a 1:1 mix of Mix5 and an uncharacterized bacterial community isolated from river water (WaterCom), a 1:1 mix of WaterCom with 10 mM MgCl 2 vehicle, and MgCl 2 only. The 16S rDNA sequences associated with the barcoded stains are shown in shades of grey (color legend), even if those sequences may have also been already present on the uninoculated plant or in WaterCom. Other bacterial ASVs are classi fi ed to the family level (color legend). Inoc, inoculum; D0, day 0 plant sample; D7, day 7 plant sample. B) Total bacterial load on plants, determined as the ratio of 16S rDNA (excluding tagging constructs) to the Gigantea gene using hamPCR. Statistical differences between groups at D7 were assessed using a Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post hoc test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons. Different letters above the boxes indicate signi fi cant differences ( p < 0.05). C) Same as (B), but for the load of tagging constructs (excluding all 16S rDNA). Statistical differences between groups at D7 were assessed using a Kruskal-Wallis test. No signi fi cant differences were detected ( p = 0.59; ns). D) Relative abundances of the barcodes only for those conditions that included Mix5, following the color legend in (A). In all panels, barcode abundances shown were corrected for technical differences in ampli fi cation ef fi ciency ( Methods ). 

11 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

An improved universal tagging system 

We were unsatis fi ed with the glmS 3’ UTR as a clean integration site in our  fi ve strains, due either to small landing pads intolerant of slight targeting errors, or to co-directional downstream genes for which transcription might be interrupted. To see if these potentially problematic features were more widespread in Sphingomonas, we investigated genomic structure around glmS in 138 non-redundant genomes in our culture collection, ignoring 

highly-similar genomes differing by less than 1% MASH distance  [24] . We recorded the 

orientation of the next annotated feature and its distance from the stop codon, and whether the 3’ UTR included any other non-coding feature (eg. noncoding RNA). Indeed, in a majority (70%) of cases, the next gene or feature was either < 34 bp from the glmS stop codon or was co-directional, and thus would be affected by our transposon ( Fig 5A ). We created an additional sequence resource from which to screen variation by culturing 250 diverse Sphingomonas from 25 geographically-separated Arabidopsis rosettes around Uppsala, Sweden (10 isolates per rosette) and sequencing the pool as an unindexed metagenome with long reads. We also saved pool aliquots as a glycerol stock for later bulk culturing ( Methods ). In this sequence resource as well, we annotated glmS and downstream features. As with individual genomes, in a majority of cases, insertion downstream of glmS appeared problematic ( Fig 5A ). 

To search for a more robust insertion location, we used the targetFinder algorithm  [25]  as well 

as a pangenome constructed with PPanGGOLiN to search 48 closed Sphingomonas genomes for convergently terminating ORFs, requiring a minimum gap size of 50 bp. We found that rpoZ (DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit omega) emerged as a gene  fl anking such a gap in a majority of strains. A full analysis of the gap revealed that in more than 90% of cases, both in non-redundant Sphingomonas genomes and the pooled mix of 250 diverse Sphingomonas, the rpoZ 3’ UTR provided a likely safe landing pad ( Fig 5B ). We then searched for a guide family in the  fi nal 75 bp of rpoZ, following the logic described earlier for glmS,  fi nding several acceptable candidates ( Supplementary Fig 7 ). We extended this analysis to the gamma-Proteobacteria Pseudomonas ( Supplementary Table 4 ), another common member of 

the phyllosphere that has been extensively transformed with Tn7  [10,26–28] . Surprisingly, the 

region downstream of glmS was also problematic in many genomes ( Fig 5C ). Further, rpoZ did not pose a solution in Pseudomonas, with the next element co-directional in all observed cases (Fig 5D ). However, a new search within Pseudomonas revealed that gaps downstream of pyrD (quinone-dependent dihydroorotate dehydrogenase), and fur (ferric uptake regulator), were excellent genus-wide candidates with convergently terminating gaps in nearly all surveyed strains. Further, as with Sphingomonas, there was suf fi cient gene conservation to  fi nd attractive guide families for each gene, with predicted insertions occurring in the safe landing pad (Supplementary Fig 8 ). 

12 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

Figure 5. Safer integration loci for high-throughput tagging 

A) Elements downstream of glmS in 138 non-redundant Sphingomonas genomes (left) or in a sequenced pool of 250 Sphingomonas isolates (right). Zero on the x-axis represents the glmS stop codon, and distance along the x-axis represents base pairs until another feature that was convergently terminating (black, above), or co-directional (red, below). The dotted blue vertical line represents the expected transposon insertion location based on the chosen guide family, with its distance from the stop codon indicated. The pink shaded box surrounds acceptable situations for which a convergently terminating feature is downstream of the expected insertion, with the percent of acceptable insertions indicated. B) As in (A), but for the region downstream of the rpoZ gene. C-D) As in (A) and (B), but in a collection of 194 Pseudomonas genomes. E) tagIMseq mapping for a pool of 200 primary transformants with a guide targeting rpoZ in S. melonis FR1. The y-axis represents the rpoZ stop codon, and the distance to each point along the x-axis represents the distance to an observed transposon insertion. Black dots, and the black percentage, represent acceptable cases in which the insertion precedes the convergently terminating rlmE gene, while red dots and the red percentage represent insertions outside of this acceptable range. F) Single nucleotide variants between the genomes of isolates CC-001 and CC-010 (black) and the tandem triple rpoZ guides (blue) used to transform the pool of 250 Sphingomonas. 

13 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

To test the rpoZ 3’UTR, we synthesized a guide for S. melonis FR1 ( Supplementary Table 2 ), and generated transformants using pSPIN-LL. To economically map the insertion locations and their associated barcodes, we developed the method Tagmentation transposon Insertion site 

Mapping by Sequencing (tagIMseq), building on a method by  [29] , and validated it on a 

template of pooled DNA from the 10 glmS- and crtI-tagged strains for which we had previously veri fi ed insertion sites by whole genome sequencing ( Fig 2 ). We further veri fi ed that it worked on a suspension of whole bacterial cells from a single colony of one of those strains ( Methods ,

Supplementary Fig 9 and 10 ). Equipped with tagIMseq, we pooled 200 rpoZ-targeting transformant colonies and mapped all insertions in the pool, which revealed that just over half of transformants were suf fi ciently on-target to fall in the acceptable landing pad ( Fig 5E ). To isolate correctly tagged colonies, we further improved our screening pipeline to  fi rst use colony PCR with an rpoZ-speci fi c primer and a transposon-speci fi c primer to con fi rm the presence of a putatively on-target genomic insertion as a band visualized by gel electrophoresis. We then used the same colony suspension for tagIMseq for precise transposon mapping and off-target screening for those PCR-positive colonies. In all six cases tested, tagIMseq revealed PCR-positive colonies had a single on-target insertion in the rpoZ 3’ UTR ( Supplementary Fig 7). 

We selected an on-target insertion and conducted a similar  fi tness test as we had used for glmS-targeting mutants, and detected no signi fi cant  fi tness effect ( Supplementary Fig 3 and Supplementary Discussion ). We therefore decided to establish feasibility for high-throughput tagging using the rpoZ guide family by using it to target our uncharacterized pool of 250 diverse Sphingomonas. To prepare the most broadly-useful guides, we extracted rpoZ guide sequences from the pool and clustered them at 93% identity (allowing for 2 mismatches in the 

32 bp guide) using USEARCH  [30] . We then took the representative sequences from the top 

three most abundant bins and created a triple tandem guide sequence for ligation into pSPIN-LL ( Supplementary Fig 11 ). Next, we transformed the pool of 250 strains directly using bacteria washed from the thawed glycerol stock, and plated the conjugation mix on selective media. From our transformants, we analyzed ten colonies by colony PCR to con fi rm an insertion downstream of rpoZ, found two that had a positive signal, and performed tagIMseq on those colonies to identify bases associated with all integration locations. In each case, this revealed a single insertion. We sequenced the genomes of these strains, which further revealed that in both cases the next coding sequence was a convergently terminating Ribosomal RNA large subunit methyltransferase E ( rlmE) gene ( Supplementary Fig 12 ). The two recovered genomes differed from each other with a MASH distance of 0.22 corresponding to variation in 

approximately 1 in 5 bases  [24] , and while one of the genomes had an rpoZ sequence exactly 

matching one of the three guides, the other differed from all other guides by 3 bases ( Fig 5F ). 

# Discussion 

Here we have designed a minimalist tagging construct and targeted it to custom locations in diverse isolates of the genus Sphingomonas. Prior to the development of CASTs as 

14 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

biotechnology tools, this would have required homologous recombination, a process which 

requires inclusion of bacterial genomic sequences on both sides of the insertion construct  [18] .

While there are ef fi cient tools using linear DNA and short (35-80 bp) regions of homology in E.coli,  [31] , use of homologous regions of 500 bp or more is typical for non-model organisms 

[18] . The longer the homologous sequence required, the less likely the same construct can be 

recycled for use in a genetically-distinct organism. This practical dif fi culty has driven the interest 

in transposons like Tn7  [32] , and the ease of inserting longer pieces of DNA with Tn7 is such 

that, when faced with a situation for which an organism is missing an attTn7 site or if the native attTn7 site is not tolerated, researchers have sometimes taken the circuitous approach of inserting an attTn7 site at a custom location via homologous recombination, such that the 

innate Tn7 proteins can recognize it  [33,34] .

Like the bacterial tagging system “MoBacTags” described by Ordon et al.  [7] , our constructs 

include conserved 16S rDNA priming sites that allow direct comparison of barcode abundances to background 16S rDNA abundances in a complex sample. However, our priming sites correspond to the V4 region instead of the V5-V7 region of MoBacTags, and our amplicon is precisely size-matched to V4 16S rDNA amplicons. As with MoBacTags, we observed reproducible barcode-speci fi c effects on the tag-to-16S read count ratios for different tags, 

even within the same bacterial strain ( Fig 3 ) [7,35] . Here we followed the approach of Ordon et 

al.  [7]  to use the 16S-to-tag ratio in DNA preps from individual strains to calculate a “correction 

factor” for the barcode abundance in each strain, but we also provide evidence that this approach carries risks and is likely only valid for DNA from stationary phase cultures for which 

replication-associated gene dosage effects on rDNA are minimized  [22]  (Supplementary Fig 4 ). 

The hamPCR methodology we developed to measure barcode-speci fi c ampli fi cation bias (Supplementary Fig 5 and 6 ), which is immune from gene dosage effects, should prove a more robust method to measure correction factors. After applying appropriate correction factors, the DNA barcodes can be analyzed essentially as 16S rDNA amplicons using the same pipeline, enabling strain level resolution in complex microbial and host backgrounds ( Fig 4 ). 

An important insight from our genomic analysis was that the Tn7 site may be more problematic as a  fi tness-neutral site than is generally assumed. While there are scattered reports of  fi tness 

penalties due to Tn7 integration  [10,34] , in most cases the genomic architecture or functions of 

the downstream region is not considered  [7] , and in many cases  fi tness tests of the tagged 

strains are not even conducted. It is encouraging that the Sphingomonas Leaf 257 tagged by 

Tn7 in Daniel et al.  [8]  apparently had no  fi tness defects in vitro or in planta, because a 

co-directional putative bi-functional diguanylate cyclase-phosphodiesterase only 78 bp downstream was likely disrupted. While genes downstream of glmS may be dispensible, this is 

almost certainly context dependent  [36] . The gene downstream of glmS in S. melonis FR1, for 

example, is a ROK family fructokinase which is important for fructose metabolism. While this might not slow growth in rich media, it could be more problematic in some oligotrophic leaf 

environments where fructose is a primary carbon source  [37] . In any case, it is preferable to 

avoid disrupting open reading frames and operons, and our results indicate that the region 

15 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

downstream of rpoZ has a superior genetic architecture as a neutral site in Sphingomonas. While the region downstream of rpoZ is unsuitable in Pseudomonas ( Fig 5 ), we identi fi ed promising highly-conserved gaps between convergently terminating genes in Pseudomonas using the same approach ( Supplementary Fig 8 ). This underscores that it is both necessary and feasible to consider different conserved safe sites depending on the genetic background. 

Unlike in E. coli, where off-target insertions with VchCASTs are rare exceptions  [9] , in Sphingomonas we recovered off-target insertions in more than ⅓ of events, ranging from a few bases to thousands of kilobases away ( Fig 5E ). Therefore, precise insertion mapping and detection of off-targets is especially important. We developed an ef fi cient and economical transposon mapping by sequencing pipeline, tagIMseq ( Supplementary Fig 9 and 10 ). Remarkably, the method works without a DNA prep, and when sequenced promptly tagIMseq allows decisions to be made about individual colonies before subculturing becomes necessary, providing substantial time savings. In addition to ef fi cient screening, it is likely that CAST technology will continue to improve. Recently, a genetic screen for factors in fl uencing VchCAST transposition uncovered activator and inhibitor genes that are distributed differently 

among Gram negative bacteria, and contribute to poor ef fi ciency in some species  [38] . The 

authors modi fi ed their VchCAST delivery vector to express bacteriophage λ-Red genes (exo, beta, and gam) and were able to signi fi cantly increase ef fi ciency; such a system may further improve ef fi ciency in organisms like Sphingomonas. 

Our successful use of a guide with 5 mismatches ( Fig 1F, Fig 2 ) demonstrates that limited sequence variation is tolerated. While this tolerance could complicate the avoidance of off-target insertions in a genome, it is an advantage when targeting a unique locus across diverse genomes. We further exploited this tolerance for mismatches when designing three guides for rpoZ to broadly target plant-associated Sphingomonas, and indeed recovered a correctly-tagged isolate that had three nucleotide variants distinguishing it from the nearest of the three guide sequences ( Fig 5F , Supplementary Fig 11 ). A large synthetic community of highly similar but readily-distinguishable strains would be a transformative resource for the study of bacterial natural genetic variation, enabling associating unique alleles with bacterial 

fi tness  [39] . Further, streamlining the process of disrupting and tagging orthologous gene 

families across diverse strains extends mechanistic microbial genetics from the model-strain level to the population level. 

16 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

# Methods 

Creation of pSPIN-LL barcode library 

As a transposon payload, the pSPIN-LL plasmid includes 1) a tetracycline resistance gene 

fl anked by  fl ippase (frt) sites, followed by 2) a transcription termination region and a unique 16 bp barcode  fl anked by both V4 16S rRNA priming sites and unique priming sites. We also modi fi ed the pSPIN backbone outside of the payload by adding a synthetic rpsL gene from 

pVHD  [17]  that serves as a negative selection marker in most Sphingomonas  [18] . The plasmid 

library was constructed as described below. 

– Construction of pSPIN-LL payload 

Our construct design was largely ordered directly as a synthetic construct (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA), but also involved some cloning intermediates. We describe only an overview of the intermediate processes, as they did not proceed directly to our  fi nal construct and ultimately are not important because the  fi nal sequence of the construct is published here and the plasmid itself is available upon request. Brie fl y, our original synthetic fragment included a  fl ippase site, a gentamicin resistance gene, a green  fl uorescent protein (GFP), another  fl ippase site, and  fi nally a region  fl anked by useful PCR sites that included transcription terminators and a 16 bp unique barcode. The barcode diversity was created by amplifying the construct with a custom oligo including random bases. We decided to replace the gentamicin and GFP in the original cassette with tetracycline resistance, and we therefore 

ampli fi ed the tetR promoter and tetR gene from pVHD  [17]  using primers L0129 and L0130, 

and ampli fi ed other parts of the construct we wished to keep and spliced them together into cloning vector pJET1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA) using the GeneArt Gibson assembly kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). We collected hundreds of colonies, each representing unique barcodes, and re-isolated plasmid from the pooled colonies. 

– Adding construct and rpsL to pSPIN 

The synthetic rpsL gene from pAK405 conferring streptomycin sensitivity  [18]  was ampli fi ed 

using primers L0066 + L0067, and moved by Gibson cloning into a pSPIN backbone that we had been previously cut with FastDigest KpnI (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA). This construct was then used as a template to amplify the region from the 3’ end of the payload site through the newly-added rpsL gene, using the primer pair L0077+L0078. In parallel, we ampli fi ed the full construct from pJET1.2 using L0075+L0074. Finally, we cut again the original, unmodi fi ed pSPIN with FastDigest XhoI and Fastdigest KpnI and gel puri fi ed the vector. We  fi nally cloned the insertion construct (L0075+L0074) and the plasmid rpsL fragment (L0077+L0078) into pSPIN using the Gibson method to make pSPIN-LL ( Supplementary Fig 1 ), and selected transformants on 10 μg/mL tetracycline plates. 

17 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

– Generating additional barcode diversity in pSPIN-LL 

The  fi rst instance of pSPIN-LL construct had around 400 unique barcodes. To generate a more diverse library, we used pSPIN-LL as a template and re-ampli fi ed the majority of the payload using primers L0075+L0022, and we ampli fi ed the barcode and rpsL gene with L0261+L0078. These fragments were cloned by Gibson into original unmodi fi ed pSPIN that had been cut with both XhoI and KpnI and gel puri fi ed, thus remaking pSPIN-LL such that each colony represents a unique barcode. 

Checking guide RNAs for o ff -target risks 

Annotation-independent off-target analysis was performed using Bowtie2 (v2.5.4) within the framework established by CAST-guide-RNA-tool 

(https://github.com/sternberglab/CAST-guide-RNA-tool ), with slight modi fi cations. While the 

same computational environment was used for the analysis, a customized Bowtie2 search strategy was used of end-to-end alignment to verify the full 32 bp gRNA sequence, a 5 bp seed length (-L=5), zero allowable mismatches in the seed region (-N=0), and increased search depth (-D=10). Potential off-targets were identi fi ed through direct quanti fi cation of mismatch 

counts in the resulting SAM  fi les and visualization performed in RStudio using the ggplot2  [40] 

package. 

Plasmid DNA Extraction 

Plasmids were extracted from E.coli by alkaline lysis  [41] . For cloning into pSPIN-LL an 

additional chloroform puri fi cation was performed by adding 400 μL chloroform to the resuspended plasmid DNA, vortexing, and mixing the clari fi ed aqueous phase with 1/9 volume 3M Sodium Acetate (NaAc) and 8/9 volume of isopropanol to form a precipitate collected by centrifugation. This pellet was washed with 80% ethanol, and  fi nally resuspended in 500 μL of elution buffer (EB; 10 mM Tris pH 8.0). Puri fi ed plasmid DNA was treated with 1μL / 100 μL of RNase A (10 mg/mL, Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA), and further cleaned with 

solid-phase reversible immobilization (SPRI) beads  [23]  using a 1:1 ratio of beads to DNA. DNA 

concentration was quanti fi ed using a Qubit  fl uorometer (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions. 

Inserting guides into pSPIN-LL 

Cloning of guide sequences into pSPIN-LL plasmids was performed as described in  [42] . The 

32 bp target sequence for the CRISPR integrase plus the 2 bp Protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) site was ordered as two complementary oligos that were phosphorylated with T4 Polynucleotide Kinase (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA) to enable ligation and annealed to make a duplex. Primer names used for oligo duplex are detailed in Supplementary Table 2 . All primer sequences can be found in Supplementary Table 1 .

18 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

Con fi rmation of correct guide insertions in E. coli 

Colonies of transformed E. coli that grew on tetracycline selective media were screened by colony PCR using one primer speci fi c to the guide sequence (the one starting with 5’TTCAC…) and another speci fi c to the transposon construct (L0056). See Supplementary Table 1-2 

Transformation of Sphingomonas 

The E. coli diaminopimelic acid (DAP) auxotrophic donor strain WM3064 was made 

electrocompetent as in  [43] . A ligated pSPIN-LL plasmid including a guide sequence and the 

randomly barcoded construct were introduced by pipetting 5 μL of the resuspended ligation reaction into 50 μL of chilled electrocompetent E. coli in 1 mm cuvettes. The mixture was pulsed with standard conditions for E. coli (25 μF, 200 ohm, 1800 V) using the Gene Pulser Xell (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Following the recovery period, the E. coli cells were pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended in 60 μL of LB + 0.3 mM DAP (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA) liquid medium, and plated on LB agar plates containing 10 μg/mL tetracycline. The plates were incubated overnight at 37°C, allowing only the bacteria carrying the modi fi ed plasmids to grow. 

The plasmids were conjugated from the above transformed E. coli cells to Sphingomonas through a direct cell-to-cell contact mechanism during an overnight co-culturing step. E. coli cells carrying the modi fi ed pSPIN-LL vectors were grown overnight at 37°C in LB media with 0.3 mM DAP and 10 μg/mL tetracycline. When they reached an OD600 of 1.0, 3 mL of bacterial culture was pelleted, washed via resuspension in fresh LB liquid supplemented with DAP, and resuspended in 500 μL LB media. Similarly, the Sphingomonas strains were grown at 28 °C for 2 days in LB media with 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 3 mL was washed and resuspended in 500 μL of LB. The E. coli and Sphingomonas were combined, and this 1 mL was again pelleted, resuspended in 60 μL LB liquid with DAP, pipetted as dot on LB agar with DAP but no antibiotic, and incubated at 28°C for 16 hours. 

The conjugation mix was then scraped off with a sterile loop, plated onto LB Agar plates with 10 μg/mL tetracycline and 100 μg/mL streptomycin and without DAP to remove E. coli cells and select for transformed Sphingomonas without pSPIN-LL. 

Con fi rmation of transformed Sphingomonas 

By colony PCR 

Initially, colony PCR was performed only to rule out the continued presence of the pSPIN-LL plasmid using primers L0066 + L0067 speci fi c to the synthetic rpsL construct, and to verify the presence of the transposon insertion using unique primers L0116 and L0262. Later, only a primer binding to the guide location (eg. L0427) and a primer binding to the 5’ end of the insertion construct (L0120) was used to reveal colonies with insertions within close range of their insertion. 

19 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

By whole genome sequencing 

For each of our  fi ve focal Sphingomonas strains, DNA from one strain each for the crtI and glmS-targeting transformations was pooled, and bacterial genome sequencing on the pool of 2 was performed by Plasmidsaurus (Plasmidsaurus Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA) using Oxford Nanopore Technology with custom analysis and annotation. Reads containing the barcoded transposon construct were identi fi ed in the raw fastq  fi le using the following regular expression and its reverse complement. Genomic regions just upstream and downstream of the transposon border were used to con fi rm that each barcode was associated with a single insertion, and to map that location. 

"GCCTTTTTGCGT[ACGT]{16}TTACCGCGGCTGCTG" 

By Tagmentation transposon Insertion site Mapping sequencing (tagIMseq) 

Brie fl y, our method uses Tn5-based tagmentation followed by PCR using an insertion-speci fi cprimer and an adapter-speci fi c primer, and is adapted with some additional modi fi cations from 

[29] .

Template preparation 

For re-analyzing the ten crtI and glmS-targeting mutants as a pool, individual DNAs from each strain were combined. For analyzing rpoZ-targeting transformants as pools, colonies from the initial transformation were subcultured once by plating in a grid on a fresh streptomycin and tetracycline plate. After 24-48 hours of growth, all bacteria from the grid were pooled and the pellet was used for DNA extraction as described below. For analyzing individual bacteria, high quality DNA was either prepared from individual isolates, or, for colony tagIMseq, a single colony was resuspended in 14 μL of water and 7 μL was used as template. 

Preparation of assembled Tn5 

Tn5 was procured from Protein Production Sweden. Duplexes were prepared by annealing the appropriate oligonucleotides (listed below) in annealing buffer containing 100mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 500 mM NaCl. Duplex A was generated by mixing 9 μL of 100μM Tn5ME_A (L0361) with 9μL of 100μM aminoME_rev (L0376) and 2 μL annealing buffer. Duplex B was prepared similarly using Tn5ME_longB (L0416) and aminoME_rev (L0376). Oligonucleotides were annealed by incubation at 98°C for 3 minutes, followed by cooling to 23°C at a rate of 0.1°C /sec. Duplex A and B were then mixed. Tn5 stock was diluted by mixing 1 μL of stock with 16 μL of dilution buffer containing 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 50% glycerol. To the diluted Tn5, 3 μL of the mixed duplexes were added, and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. 

Tagmentation and initial PCR ampli fi cation 

Both the tagmentation and ampli fi cation reactions were performed in a Bio-Rad T100 thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). For DNA templates, the tagmentation mixture included 1 μL of DNA (10 ng/μL), 0.2 μL of assembled Tn5, and 2 μL of 5x 

20 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

TAPS-DMF-MgCl  [44] ₂, and 6.8 μL nuclease-free water for a  fi nal volume of 10 μL. For bacterial 

colony templates, the colony was resuspended in 14 μL water and tagmentation was performed with 7 μL of this resuspension as template, 1 μL assembled Tn5, and 2 μL 5x TAPS-DMF-MgCl 2. Tagmentation mixtures were incubated at 55°C for 7 minutes, followed by Tn5 inactivation with 2.5 μL of 0.2% SDS and incubation at 55°C for an additional 7 minutes. A 

fi rst round of PCR was performed using primers annealing to the insertion construct just upstream of the barcode (L0426) and to the transposon-added Nextera overhang (L0417). To denature DNA just prior to PCR ampli fi cation and prevent “gap  fi lling” at the Tn5-added adapters, 1.5 μL tagmentation product was mixed with 8.5μL nuclease-free water and denatured at 98°C for 3 minutes. The PCR reagents were then added to a  fi nal volume of 25 μL, including 0.5 μM each primer, 5x HF buffer, 200 μM dNTPs, and 0.25 μL Phusion™ Hot Start II DNA Polymerases (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA). The PCR program was set to 98°C for 30 seconds, 30 cycles of 98°C for 30 seconds, 68°C for 15 seconds, and 72°C for 50 seconds, and  fi nally a single extension at 72°C for 5 minutes. PCR products were puri fi ed using 0.6x SPRI beads and resuspended in 15 μL nuclease-free water. 

Preparation of library 

A second round of PCR was performed using 1 μL of the puri fi ed  fi rst-round PCR product as template and was ampli fi ed with a Nextera P7 index primer ( Supplementary Table 1 ) binding to the overhang from primer L0417, and a TruSeq index primer ( Supplementary Table 1 )containing the P5 lllumina adaptor, with each at a  fi nal concentration of 0.5 μM. The reaction also contained 5×HF buffer, 200 μM dNTPs, 1.25 μL Phusion DNA Polymerase (Protein Production Sweden, working stock: 60 μg/mL;  fi nal concentration: 3 μg/mL), and nuclease-free water to a  fi nal volume of 25 μL. The PCR program was set to 98°C for 3 minutes, 18 cycles of 98°C for 30 seconds, 68°C for 15 seconds, and 72°C for 50 seconds, with a  fi nal extension at 72°C for 5 minutes. The  fi nal PCR products were puri fi ed using a double-sided SPRI bead cleanup (0.4x-0.6x), and then DNA concentration was quanti fi ed using Qubit. 

Read processing and  fi ltering 

R1 reads were concatenated with the reverse-complement of the corresponding R2 reads to generate a single arti fi cial continuous sequence. The combined reads were  fi rst  fi ltered to keep only those containing the insertion sequence (GCAGGACGCCCGCCATAAA). (grep -Eo "GCAGGACGCCCGCCATAAA.*"). The second  fi lter came with  fi ltering the remaining reads that carried a 17 bp sequence (GGATGGCCTTTTTGCGT) before the insertion barcode, a 19 bp sequence (TTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCAC) after the barcode, and a 20 bp sequence (ACTTTATGGTTGCATCAACA) at the end of the insertion (grep -Eo "GGATGGCCTTTTTGCGT.{16}TTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCAC.*ACTTTATGGTTGCATCAACA"). In addition,  fi ltered reads were required to contain at least 50 bp of sequence downstream of the insertion end. After  fi ltering, all sequences upstream of and including GGATGGCCTTTTTGCGT, as well as downstream of and including TTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCAC, were excluded to extract the insertion barcode and quantify barcode counts. Reads corresponding to the correct barcodes were then used to extract the 50 

21 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

bp sequence downstream of the insertion. These potential downstream sequences were arranged from high to low by percentage for each barcode, and the highest one was selected for mapping to the reference genome. 

Bacterial and plant DNA extraction 

For bacterial pellets, the  fi nal pellets were resuspended in at least 750 μL of DNA lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, and 1.5% SDS. Especially large pellets (greater than 5 mm from the bottom of the tube) were suspended in proportionally greater volumes of buffer to ensure an ef fi cient lysis, and 750 μL was used for lysis. The suspension was pipetted to a screw cap tube containing a 0.5 mL of a 1:1 mixture of 0.1 mm and 0.5 mm zirconia/silica beads (Bio Spec Products Inc., Bartlesville, USA) and homogenized in a FastPrep 24 (MP Biomedicals, LLC, Solon, OH, USA)instrument at 6 m/s for 1 min, following a subsequent incubation at 55°C for 1 hour. The tubes were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 min, and the supernatant (about 600 μL) was mixed with 200 μL sterile 5 M potassium acetate in a 1.5 mL tube to precipitate the SDS. The tubes were chilled on ice for 10 min, then spun at 14,000 x g for 8 min, and the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 mL tube. Then, 360 μL SPRI beads were added to 600 μL of the supernatant (0.6:1 ratio). After mixing and incubating on a magnetic rack, the beads were cleaned with 80% ethanol twice, and DNA was eluted in at least 100 μL EB. 

For pure bacteria cultures used to generate closed genomes, an additional RNAse and chloroform cleanup step was added. To the eluted DNA, 1 μL of RNAse A (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA) was added and the mixture was incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. The DNA was diluted in water to 400 μL, and 400 μL of chloroform was added. The aqueous phase was collected and the DNA was precipitated by mixing it with an equal volume of a solution containing 1 part 3M NaAc and 8 parts isopropanol. The precipitated DNA was pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 5 minutes. The pellet was washed twice in 70% ethanol and eluted again in at least 100 μL EB. 

For plant material, leaves were added to screw-cap tubes containing 0.5 mL of a 1:1 mixture of 0.1 mm and 0.5 mm zirconia/silica beads (BioSpec Products, Inc., Bartlesville, OK, USA),  fl ash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and homogenized in the FastPrep 24 at 4 m/s for 15 s. Then, 750 μL lysis buffer was added and the extraction proceeded as above. 

Pool of 250 Sphingomonas cultivation and sequencing 

The 250-member Sphingomonas pool was produced by taking 25 A. thaliana individuals from around Uppsala, Sweden. Rosettes were rinsed in sterile water to remove adhered soil, and crushed in sterile mortar and pestle. The plant homogenates were resuspended in 0.5X phosphate buffered saline (PBS), and mixed with glycerol (20% v/v) to make culturable freezer stocks. Bacteria were recovered from glycerol by plating on low salt LB media plates with streptomycin (100 μg/mL) and cycloheximide (100 μg/mL). After 72 hours of incubation at room temperature, 10 randomly-chosen colonies from each Arabidopsis individual were picked and 

22 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

passed to a fresh LB plate for even growing, resulting in 250 isolates growing in parallel. After 72 hours of incubation, the 250 isolates were scraped off and homogenized in 10 mM MgCl 2.The bacterial suspension was adjusted to OD 600 = 1, mixed with glycerol (20% v/v) and stored at -70°C. An aliquot of the resuspended mix centrifuged and the pellet used for DNA extraction as described above for bacterial pellets. The 250 isolates community DNA was sequenced with long reads on half of a PacBio HiFi Revio  fl ow cell (Paci fi c Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, USA) to generate approximately 45 Gb (Novogene, Beijing, China). 

Constructing amplicon libraries 

Of the DNA barcode using unique primers or 16S rDNA primers 

Ampli fi cation of the uniquely barcoded region was performed in two rounds of PCR. In the  fi rst round, construct-speci fi c primers (L0116 and L0262) were used. PCR reactions were performed in a total volume of 25 μL containing 1× Phusion HF buffer, 0.5 μL of 10 mM dNTP mix, 1.25 μL of each 5 μM primer, 1.25 μL of Phusion DNA polymerase (Protein Production Sweden, working stock: 60 μg/mL;  fi nal concentration: 3 μg/mL), 1 μL of template DNA (20 - 60 ng), and nuclease-free water to volume. Between the  fi rst and second PCR rounds, amplicons were puri fi ed using SPRI beads at a 1:1.1 DNA to SPRI ratio and eluted in 12 μL of nuclease-free water. Subsequently, 10 μL of the puri fi ed product was used as a template for the second-round of PCR, which was performed using the same reaction composition with Nextera index primers ( Supplementary Table 1 ). The  fi rst-round PCR was performed for 15 cycles, and the second-round PCR for 20 cycles, resulting in a total of 35 ampli fi cation cycles. Ampli fi cation using 16S rDNA primers was performed identically, except that primers L0009 and L0010 were used for the  fi rst round of PCR. Following ampli fi cation, reactions for each amplicon type were run on a 1% agarose gel to verify a distinct band and for rough quanti fi cation of product. Samples were then pooled based on the relative brightness of each band on the gel, as estimated by eye. The  fi nal pool was cleaned with SPRI beads with a 0.9:1 SPRI to DNA ratio to remove primer dimers. 

by hamPCR 

For the inoculation experiments described in Fig 4 , hamPCR was performed similarly to  [23] .

Primers L0009 and L0010 were used to tag the 16S rDNA region, and primers L0011 and L0012 were used to tag the Gigantea gene. Each reaction contained 5 μL of DNA template (25-250 ng), and the protocol consisted of an initial tagging PCR of 10 cycles using DreamTaq DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA), followed by bead cleanup and a second exponential PCR of 25 cycles using Nextera index primers and Phusion DNA polymerase. The  fi nal pool of all normalized samples was run on a 2% agarose gel to separate the Gigantea and 16S rDNA bands. Both bands were cut out, gel puri fi ed with the GeneJET Gel Extraction Kit ( (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c, Waltham, MA, USA), and the GI product was mixed with the 16S rDNA product in a 1:4 ratio to reduce the relative contribution of host amplicon to the pool. 

23 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

To investigate DNA barcode ampli fi cation differences, another hamPCR strategy was used targeting the tetracycline gene and the DNA barcode region within the same barcoding construct ( Supplementary Fig 5 and 6 ). A 2-cycle tagging step was performed using primers L0467 and L0472 for the tetracycline gene, and L0471 and L0262 for the barcode region using DreamTaq DNA Polymerase. This was followed by a clean up with 1:1.1 DNA to SPRI beads ratio and a 28-cycle exponential PCR with nextera primers as described above. Amplicons were both visualized on a 2% agarose gel and sequenced, and the ratio of the tetracycline region to the barcode region in each strain was used to determine barcode-speci fi c ampli fi cation differences. 

Short read sequencing and amplicon processing 

Using Illumina MiSeq 

For most amplicon samples, different sub-libraries were  fi rst diluted to 6 nM, pooled by volume, and then sequenced at 80 pmol with ~5% PhiX on an Illumina MiSeq i100 series (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) using a 25M reagent kit with 300 cycles. Sequencing reads were demultiplexed by the Illumina platform, and only forward reads were used for downstream analysis. Primer sequences were identi fi ed and trimmed from their respective datasets using 

USEARCH v11.0.667  [30] , including tagging construct speci fi c primers, primers for the bacterial 

16S V4 region, and plant Gigantea primers  [23] . Reads that did not match the expected primer 

sequences were discarded. The remaining reads were then quality-fi ltered with USEARCH to retain only high-quality sequences. All  fi ltered reads were pooled and dereplicated at 100% 

sequence identity using VSEARCH v2.25.0  [45] . Amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) were 

inferred as zero-radius operational taxonomic units (ZOTUs) using the UNOISE3 algorithm, 

which performs both error correction and chimera removal  [46] . Taxonomic classi fi cation of 16S 

rDNA ZOTUs was carried out using the SINTAX classi fi er against the RDP 16S training set v18 

(21k sequences)  [47,48] . Finally, read counts were mapped to the ZOTUs at a 99% sequence 

identity threshold using VSEARCH to generate the  fi nal abundance tables. For the pure-culture calibration dataset, ZOTU counts of endogenous 16S rDNA were normalized to their known genomic copy numbers ( Fig 3E ). Ratios between copy-number–corrected endogenous 16S rDNA ZOTUs and synthetic tagging construct ZOTUs were used to calculate strain-speci fi campli fi cation correction factors ( Fig 3F ). Finally, these correction factors were applied to the hamPCR dataset ( Fig 4A ) to account for barcode ampli fi cation bias before  fi nal relative abundance estimation. Bacterial load was calculated as the ratio of 16S rDNA abundance to Gigantea amplicons as in  [23] . All downstream normalization, aggregation, and visualization 

steps were performed in R using the packages reshape  [49]  and ggplot2  [40] .

Using Oxford Nanopore 

All tagIMseq libraries to verify transposon insertion locations were sequenced by Plasmidsaurus as “Premium PCR Sequencing” using Oxford Nanopore Technology. 

24 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

Genomes and annotation 

Bacterial genomes used in this study and their source are listed in Supplementary Table 4 . All 

bacterial genomes were annotated with BAKTA version 1.11.4  [50]  using the full database of 

AA & DNA sequences and HMM & covariance models hosted at 

https://zenodo.org/records/14916843 . To determine neutral insertion sites in Pseudomonas, 

the NCBI RefSeq  [51]  annotations were also considered. 

Benign insertion site identi fi cation 

For Sphingomonas, the TargetFinder  [25]  algorithm was used to identify gaps between 

convergently transcribed genes in 50 closed Sphingomonas genomes from our collection, requiring a minimum gap size of 100 bp. Gens names  fl anking convergent gaps in multiple genomes were ranked to identify the most highly conserved genes associated with gaps. Candidate gaps were then evaluated in a panel of 138 “non-redundant” Sphingomonas 

genomes. The non-redunant panel was created by using MASH  [24]  distances to identify 

genomes from  [13]  and this work ( Supplementary Table 4 ) that were more than 99% similar to 

each other and randomly removed from each cluster all but a single representative. 

For Pseudomonas, complete genomes from NCBI RefSeq  [51]  were similarly compared with 

MASH and redundant assemblies (more than 99% similar) were removed to create a 

non-redunant panel of 163. PPanGGOLiN (v2.2.1)  [52]  was used to create a Pseudomonas 

chromosomal pangenome from these by clustering genes with at least 60% similarity over 80% of the gene into families. Only genes of at least 50 bp occurring in families present in at least 95% of genomes were considered. Only genes bordering co-termination gaps with at least 50 bp before the next gene that were not interrupted by rRNA, tRNA, tmRNA, or ncRNA were considered. To be more conservative, the RefSeq annotations were supplemented with non-coding RNA annotations generated by Bakta (1.8.1). 

Experiments with tagged strains in complex plant environments 

To evaluate the tracking ef fi ciency of tagged bacterial strains within complex microbial environments, plant experiments were performed using a synthetic community (Mix5) consisting of  fi ve glmS-targeting strains: S. melonis FR1, SphUPP:SBL2-17, SphATUE:S127H113, SphATUE:S136H113, and SphATUE:S237H113. Each bacterium was grown separately in 50 mL of low-salt LB liquid media in a 200 mL baf fl ed  fl ask until reaching a OD 600 of 0.5 - 1.0, with tetracycline (10 μg/mL) and streptomycin (100 μg/mL). Each culture was then centrifuged at 5000 x g and washed twice in 10 mM MgCl ₂ to remove antibiotics, and 

fi nally resuspended in 10 mM MgCl ₂ and adjusted to OD 600 = 1. An uncharacterized community of primarily Sphingomonas (WaterCom) was isolated from a water sample from the Fyris river (Uppsala, Sweden) on solid LB media with streptomycin (100 μg/mL) and cycloheximide (100 μg/mL) incubated for 7 days. Colonies were washed from the plate with 10 mM MgCl 2, washed twice via centrifugation and resuspension to remove antibiotics, and adjusted to OD 600 = 1. Four inoculum conditions were prepared to assess strain persistence and competitive ability: 

25 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

Mix5 alone; a 1:1 ratio of Mix5 to WaterCom; a 1:1 ratio of WaterCom to 10 mM MgCl ₂; and a 10 mM MgCl ₂-only negative control . To establish a baseline for community composition, 1 mL of each inoculum mixture was collected before inoculation as “Time-0” samples and pelleted for DNA extraction. Ten individual 3-week old Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 plants were inoculated per condition using a 9cc airbrush paintgun (Biltema, Partille, Sweden) distributing 1mL of inoculum mixture between the ten individuals until the leaf surfaces were uniformly sprayed in two applications allowing them to dry in between. All leaves from two of the inoculated plants were harvested immediately following inoculation as “Time-0 plant” samples. The remaining eight plants per condition were grown for 7 days prior to  fi nal harvest. To ensure similar biomass as the Time-0 plant samples, only two mid-sized leaves were collected from 

each plant at the  fi nal harvest. Microbial load on plants was determined using hamPCR  [23] 

.

qPCR to determine  fi tness penalties due to tagging 

To quantify both tagged and untagged bacteria, primers annealing to conserved loci in the single copy rpoZ gene were developed (primers L0443 + L0444) , producing a 108 bp amplicon. To quantify only tagged bacteria, primers annealing to the tetracycline resistance gene in our tagging construct were developed (primers L0453 + L0544), producing a 143 bp amplicon. Brie fl y, each DNA sample containing a mixture of wildtype and tagged bacteria was then ampli fi ed in three technical replicates per primer pair, using Taq Univer SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) on a Bio-Rad CFX Opus 384 machine. On the same plate, a log10 dilution series of tagged S. melonis FR1 crtI::miniTn, for which the ratio of tagging construct to rpoZ is known to be 1:1, was also ampli fi ed. Linear regression was then used on the log10 dilution series for each primer pair to create a standard curve linking Ct value to dilution value. The mean Ct value for the three technical replicates in each sample was interpreted with the correct regression to determine an absolute dilution quantity of each template in each sample. Finally, the absolute quantity of tagging construct was divided by the absolute quantity of rpoZ. Each 10 μL qPCR reaction contained 5 μL SYBR mix, 0.25 μL of a working stock (10 μM) of each primer, and 1.5 μL DNA. To reduce the presence of rpoZ primer homodimers during reaction setup, the working stock was incubated at 95°C for 2 minutes and cooled on ice to prevent correct annealing, and the reaction was set up on ice and placed into the qPCR machine after it had already reached 95°C. 

# Data availability 

All sequencing data have been deposited in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena). They can be accessed under project number PRJEB108202. Scripts 

associated with this work can be found at:  https://github.com/LundbergLand 

# Author contributions 

EMB, HB, TY, MT, and DSL conceived the study. EMB, HB, MT, NN, SH, LCH, and DSL performed inoculation and  fi tness experiments. EMB, MT, NN, and DSL created mutants. TY 

26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

developed tagIMseq. EMB, HB, TY, KAG, and DSL analyzed data. EMB and DSL wrote the paper with input from all authors. 

# Acknowledgements 

We thank Fransiska Liesecke (SLU) for early discussions about guide sequences. We thank Sophia Swartz (UC Berkeley) for discussions about VchCAST machinery and transformation tips. E. coli WM3064 was provided by Anne Lanois and Alain Givaudan (Univ. Montpellier). TY was supported in part by the Government Scholarship to Study Abroad (GSSA), Taiwan. Computation was enabled by resources provided by the National Academic Infrastructure for Supercomputing in Sweden (NAISS), partially funded by the Swedish Research Council through grant agreement no. 2022-06725. Tn5 and Phusion enzymes were procured through Protein Production Sweden. This project was supported by NGI OpenLab, Sweden. Funding for this work has been provided by a Wallenberg Academy Fellows grant to DSL (https://kaw.wallenberg.org/en, 2021.0102). 

# Competing Interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

# References 

1.  Northen TR, Kleiner M, Torres M, Kovács ÁT, Nicolaisen MH, Krzyżanowska DM, et al. 

Community standards and future opportunities for synthetic communities in 

plant-microbiota research. Nat Microbiol. 2024;9: 2774–2784. 

doi: 10.1038/s41564-024-01833-4 

2.  Glandorf DCM, Brand I, Bakker PAHM, Schippers B. Stability of rifampicin resistance as a 

marker for root colonization studies of Pseudomonas putida in the  fi eld. Plant Soil. 

1992;147: 135–142. doi: 10.1007/bf00009379 

3.  Jansson JK. Tracking genetically engineered microorganisms in nature. Curr Opin 

Biotechnol. 1995;6: 275–283. doi: 10.1016/0958-1669(95)80048-4 

4.  Rawls JF, Mahowald MA, Ley RE, Gordon JI. Reciprocal gut microbiota transplants from 

zebra fi sh and mice to germ-free recipients reveal host habitat selection. Cell. 2006;127: 

423–433. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.043 

5.  Schlechter RO, Kear EJ, Remus DM, Remus-Emsermann MNP. Fluorescent protein 

expression as a proxy for bacterial  fi tness in a high-throughput assay. Appl Environ 

Microbiol. 2021;87: e0098221. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00982-21 

6.  Egbert RG, Rishi HS, Adler BA, McCormick DM, Toro E, Gill RT, et al. A versatile platform 

strain for high-fi delity multiplex genome editing. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019;47: 3244–3256. 

doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz085 

27 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

7.  Ordon J, Thouin J, Nakano RT, Ma K-W, Zhang P, Huettel B, et al. Chromosomal barcodes 

for simultaneous tracking of near-isogenic bacterial strains in plant microbiota. Nat 

Microbiol. 2024;9: 1117–1129. doi: 10.1038/s41564-024-01619-8 

8.  Daniel BBJ, Steiger Y, Sintsova A, Field CM, Nguyen BD, Schubert C, et al. Assessing 

microbiome population dynamics using wild-type isogenic standardized hybrid 

(WISH)-tags. Nat Microbiol. 2024;9: 1103–1116. doi: 10.1038/s41564-024-01634-9 

9.  Vo PLH, Ronda C, Klompe SE, Chen EE, Acree C, Wang HH, et al. CRISPR RNA-guided 

integrases for high-ef fi ciency, multiplexed bacterial genome engineering. Nat Biotechnol. 

2021;39: 480–489. doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-00745-y 

10.  Shalev O, Karasov TL, Lundberg DS, Ashkenazy H, Pramoj Na Ayutthaya P, Weigel D. 

Commensal Pseudomonas strains facilitate protective response against pathogens in the 

host plant. Nat Ecol Evol. 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41559-022-01673-7 

11.  Choi K-H, Gaynor JB, White KG, Lopez C, Bosio CM, Karkhoff-Schweizer RR, et al. A 

Tn7-based broad-range bacterial cloning and expression system. Nat Methods. 2005;2: 

443–448. doi: 10.1038/nmeth765 

12.  Rubin BE, Diamond S, Cress BF, Crits-Christoph A, Lou YC, Borges AL, et al. Species- and 

site-speci fi c genome editing in complex bacterial communities. Nat Microbiol. 2022;7: 

34–47. doi: 10.1038/s41564-021-01014-7 

13.  Lundberg DS, de Pedro Jové R, Pramoj Na Ayutthaya P, Karasov TL, Shalev O, Poersch K, 

et al. Contrasting patterns of microbial dominance in the Arabidopsis thaliana 

phyllosphere. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2022;119: e2211881119. 

doi: 10.1073/pnas.2211881119 

14.  Matsumoto H, Fan X, Wang Y, Kusstatscher P, Duan J, Wu S, et al. Bacterial seed 

endophyte shapes disease resistance in rice. Nat Plants. 2021;7: 60–72. 

doi: 10.1038/s41477-020-00826-5 

15.  Basta T, Buerger S, Stolz A. Structural and replicative diversity of large plasmids from 

sphingomonads that degrade polycyclic aromatic compounds and xenobiotics. 

Microbiology. 2005;151: 2025–2037. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.27965-0 

16.  Huang H, Lin J, Wang W, Li S. Biopolymers produced by Sphingomonas strains and their 

potential applications in petroleum production. Polymers (Basel). 2022;14: 1920. 

doi: 10.3390/polym14091920 

17.  Kaczmarczyk A, Vorholt JA, Francez-Charlot A. Synthetic vanillate-regulated promoter for 

graded gene expression in Sphingomonas. Sci Rep. 2014;4: 6453. doi: 10.1038/srep06453 

18.  Kaczmarczyk A, Vorholt JA, Francez-Charlot A. Markerless gene deletion system for 

sphingomonads. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012;78: 3774–3777. doi: 10.1128/AEM.07347-11 

19.  Bertram R, Hillen W. The application of Tet repressor in prokaryotic gene regulation and 

expression: Tet regulation in bacteria. Microb Biotechnol. 2008;1: 2–16. 

doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2007.00001.x 

28 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

20.  Lundberg DS, Yourstone S, Mieczkowski P, Jones CD, Dangl JL. Practical innovations for 

high-throughput amplicon sequencing. Nat Methods. 2013;10: 999–1002. 

doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2634 

21.  Zhu L, Wu X, Li O, Qian C, Gao H. Cloning and characterization of genes involved in 

nostoxanthin biosynthesis of Sphingomonas elodea ATCC 31461. PLoS One. 2012;7: 

e35099. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035099 

22.  Couturier E, Rocha EPC. Replication-associated gene dosage effects shape the genomes 

of fast-growing bacteria but only for transcription and translation genes: Gene dosage 

effects and genome organisation. Mol Microbiol. 2006;59: 1506–1518. 

doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05046.x 

23.  Lundberg DS, Pramoj Na Ayutthaya P, Strauß A, Shirsekar G, Lo W-S, Lahaye T, et al. 

Host-associated microbe PCR (hamPCR) enables convenient measurement of both 

microbial load and community composition. Elife. 2021;10. doi: 10.7554/eLife.66186 

24.  Ondov BD, Treangen TJ, Melsted P, Mallonee AB, Bergman NH, Koren S, et al. Mash: fast 

genome and metagenome distance estimation using MinHash. Genome Biol. 2016;17: 

132. doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x 

25.  Bernhards CB, Liem AT, Berk KL, Roth PA, Gibbons HS, Lux MW. Putative phenotypically 

neutral genomic insertion points in prokaryotes. ACS Synth Biol. 2022;11: 1681–1685. 

doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00531 

26.  Lambertsen L, Sternberg C, Molin S. Mini-Tn7 transposons for site-speci fi c tagging of 

bacteria with  fl uorescent proteins. Environ Microbiol. 2004;6: 726–732. 

doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2004.00605.x 

27.  Barnes RJ, Leung KT, Schraft H, Ulanova M. Chromosomal gfp labelling of Pseudomonas 

aeruginosa using a mini-Tn7 transposon: application for studies of bacteria-host 

interactions. Can J Microbiol. 2008;54: 48–57. doi: 10.1139/w07-118 

28.  Matsumoto A, Schlüter T, Melkonian K, Takeda A, Nakagami H, Mine A. A versatile Tn7 

transposon-based bioluminescence tagging tool for quantitative and spatial detection of 

bacteria in plants. Plant Commun. 2022;3: 100227. doi: 10.1016/j.xplc.2021.100227 

29.  Stern DL. Tagmentation-based mapping (TagMap) of mobile DNA genomic insertion sites. 

bioRxiv. bioRxiv; 2016. p. 037762. doi: 10.1101/037762 

30.  Edgar RC. Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST. Bioinformatics. 

2010;26: 2460–2461. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq461 

31.  Datsenko KA, Wanner BL. One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli 

K-12 using PCR products. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97: 6640–6645. 

doi: 10.1073/pnas.120163297 

32.  Kuduvalli PN, Rao JE, Craig NL. Target DNA structure plays a critical role in Tn7 

transposition. EMBO J. 2001;20: 924–932. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.4.924 

33.  Roos K, Werner E, Loessner H. Multicopy integration of mini-Tn7 transposons into selected 

29 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

chromosomal sites of a Salmonella vaccine strain: Multicopy integration of mini-Tn7 

transposons. Microb Biotechnol. 2015;8: 177–187. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.12187 

34.  Jorrin B, Haskett TL, Knights HE, Martyn A, Underwood TJ, Dolliver J, et al. Stable, 

fl uorescent markers for tracking synthetic communities and assembly dynamics. 

Microbiome. 2024;12: 81. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01792-2 

35.  Silverman JD, Bloom RJ, Jiang S, Durand HK, Dallow E, Mukherjee S, et al. Measuring and 

mitigating PCR bias in microbiota datasets. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021;17: e1009113. 

doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009113 

36.  Price MN, Wetmore KM, Waters RJ, Callaghan M, Ray J, Liu H, et al. Mutant phenotypes 

for thousands of bacterial genes of unknown function. Nature. 2018;557: 503–509. 

doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0124-0 

37.  Innerebner G, Knief C, Vorholt JA. Protection of Arabidopsis thaliana against 

leaf-pathogenic Pseudomonas syringae by Sphingomonas strains in a controlled model 

system. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011;77: 3202–3210. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00133-11 

38.  Song LCT, Alker ATP, Oromí-Bosch A, Swartz SE, Martinson JNV, Arora J, et al. 

Identi fi cation of proteins in fl uencing CRISPR-associated transposases for enhanced 

genome editing. Sci Adv. 2026;12: eaea1429. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aea1429 

39.  Burgaya J, Damaris BF, Fiebig J, Galardini M. microGWAS: a computational pipeline to 

perform large-scale bacterial genome-wide association studies. Microb Genom. 2025;11: 

001349. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.001349 

40.  Wickham H. Ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis. New York, NY: Springer; 2016. 

Available:  https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org 

41.  Addgene: Handling Plasmids from Addgene - Purifying Plasmid DNA. [cited 20 Sep 2024]. 

Available:  https://www.addgene.org/protocols/purify-plasmid-dna/ 

42.  Gelsinger DR, Vo PLH, Klompe SE, Ronda C, Wang H, Sternberg SH. Bacterial genome 

engineering using CRISPR RNA-guided transposases. bioRxiv. 2023. 

doi: 10.1101/2023.03.18.533263 

43.  Choi K-H, Kumar A, Schweizer HP. A 10-min method for preparation of highly 

electrocompetent Pseudomonas aeruginosa cells: application for DNA fragment transfer 

between chromosomes and plasmid transformation. J Microbiol Methods. 2006;64: 

391–397. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2005.06.001 

44.  Picelli S, Björklund AK, Reinius B, Sagasser S, Winberg G, Sandberg R. Tn5 transposase 

and tagmentation procedures for massively scaled sequencing projects. Genome Res. 

2014;24: 2033–2040. doi: 10.1101/gr.177881.114 

45.  Rognes T, Flouri T, Nichols B, Quince C, Mahé F. VSEARCH: a versatile open source tool 

for metagenomics. PeerJ. 2016;4: e2584. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2584 

46.  Edgar RC. UNOISE2: improved error-correction for Illumina 16S and ITS amplicon 

sequencing. bioRxiv. bioRxiv; 2016. p. 081257. doi: 10.1101/081257 

30 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 6, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.24.707161 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mehmetoğlu Boz et al.  ___Scalable programmable strain tagging 

47.  Edgar RC. SINTAX: a simple non-Bayesian taxonomy classi fi er for 16S and ITS sequences. 

bioRxiv. bioRxiv; 2016. p. 074161. doi: 10.1101/074161 

48.  Wang Q, Cole JR. Updated RDP taxonomy and RDP Classi fi er for more accurate taxonomic 

classi fi cation. Microbiol Resour Announc. 2024;13: e0106323. doi: 10.1128/mra.01063-23 

49.  Wickham H. Reshaping Data with thereshapePackage. J Stat Softw. 2007;21: 1–20. 

doi: 10.18637/jss.v021.i12 

50.  Schwengers O, Jelonek L, Dieckmann MA, Beyvers S, Blom J, Goesmann A. Bakta: rapid 

and standardized annotation of bacterial genomes via alignment-free sequence 

identi fi cation: Find out more about Bakta, the motivation, challenges and applications, 

here. Microb Genom. 2021;7. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000685 

51.  O’Leary NA, Wright MW, Brister JR, Ciufo S, Haddad D, McVeigh R, et al. Reference 

sequence (RefSeq) database at NCBI: current status, taxonomic expansion, and functional 

annotation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016;44: D733–45. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1189 

52.  Gautreau G, Bazin A, Gachet M, Planel R, Burlot L, Dubois M, et al. PPanGGOLiN: 

Depicting microbial diversity via a partitioned pangenome graph. PLoS Comput Biol. 

2020;16: e1007732. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007732 

31