Title: Hybrid crosses reveal a cell-type-specific landscape of mouse regulatory variation

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Hybrid crosses reveal a cell-type-specific landscape of mouse regulatory variation 

Ryan Weber 1, Maria Carilli 2, Elisabeth Rebboah 1, Ghassan Filimban 1, Heidi Yahan Liang 1, Diane Trout 2, Margaret Duffield 1,Parvin Mahdipoor 1, Erisa Taghizadeh 1, Negar Fattahi 1, Negar Mojgani 1, Romina Mojaverzargar 1, Shimako Kawauchi 3, Brian A. Williams 2, Grant R. MacGregor 1,3 , Barbara J. Wold 2, Lior Pachter 2, Ingileif B. Hallgrimsdottir 2, and Ali Mortazavi 1,4 

> 1

Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California Irvine, Irvine, USA 

> 2

Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, USA 

> 3

Transgenic Mouse Facility, University of California Irvine, Irvine, USA 

> 4

Department of Systems Biology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, USA 

Understanding the genetic architecture of gene expression is fundamental to evolutionary biology and medicine. As part of the IGVF Consortium, we present a single-nucleus RNA-seq resource of 6.7 million nuclei across eight tissue groups, featuring seven F1 hybrids from C57BL/6J dams crossed with the other Collaborative Cross founder strains for comparison against parental strains. We identify 25,777 genes (91% of those detected) exhibiting non-conserved regulatory behavior in at least one of 92 cell types in one or more crosses. Our results show that while cis-acting variation primarily drives divergence, trans-acting effects are substantially more cell-type specific and sensitive to tissue environment. Notably, bulk tissue analyses frequently mask these signals, particularly in smaller popula-tions such as astrocytes. Furthermore, increasing genetic diver-gence primarily expands the landscape of cis-acting variation, while trans-acting effects remain stable across genetic distances within species. This atlas establishes a foundational framework for decoding the complex interplay between genetic variation and cell-type-specific regulation across the mammalian body. 

Introduction 

Heritable non-coding variants account for a substantial por-tion of the genetic contribution to phenotypic diversity, aris-ing from effects of common and rare variants in non-coding regulatory elements 1. However, how changes in genetic ar-chitecture alter gene expression, and ultimately influence traits, remains poorly understood 2. Advances in single-cell genomics enable the characterization of how genetic varia-tion shapes gene expression diversity across distinct cell pop-ulations in a cell-type-specific manner 3. A central goal of the Impact of Genomic Variation on Function (IGVF) consor-tium is to link genomic variation to function and phenotype by understanding how non-coding variation influences gene expression and downstream phenotypes in both humans and mice 4.Gene expression variability attributed to genetic varia-tion can be explained by cis-acting and/or trans-acting ge-netic variants 5. Specifically, cis-acting variants can impact a gene’s expression by altering sequences at or near motifs within nearby cis-regulatory elements that regulate the tar-get gene 6. Cis-acting variants that modulate the expression of diffusible trans-regulatory elements (such as transcription factors) can, in turn, influence the expression of many down-stream target genes, thereby giving rise to pleiotropic trans-acting effects 7,8 . Accordingly, variation in the expression of a single gene can reflect the combined influence of both cis-acting and trans-acting variants 9. When these effects act in the same direction, they contribute additively to gene ex-pression (cis+trans-acting). In contrast, when cis-acting and trans-acting variants act in opposing directions (cis ×trans-acting), their effects partially or fully counteract one an-other; such interactions are often referred to as compensatory variants 10 .One approach that has been developed to measure the contribution of cis- and trans-acting variation to gene expres-sion variability is by comparing the ratio of gene expression between homozygous parents to the ratio of allele-specific gene expression in F1 hybrids 11,12 . Under this framework, genes whose allele-specific expression differences in F1 hy-brids match the expression differences observed between the two homozygous parents are inferred to be driven primarily by cis-acting variation. In contrast, genes that show expres-sion differences between parents but no allele-specific imbal-ance in F1 hybrids are consistent with regulation by trans-acting variation. Analyses applying this approach have re-vealed substantial variation in the relative contributions of cis-, trans-, cis+trans-, and cis ×trans-acting regulation, and have been applied across a wide range of organisms, includ-ing yeast, 13 flies 14 , sticklebacks 15 , mice 16 , and plants 17 .Previous applications of this framework in mice have provided critical insights into the regulatory landscape across diverse tissues, including liver 16 , retina 18 , and testes 19 , and have characterized how regulatory effects shift in response to environmental changes 20–22 . Together, these studies quan-tified cis-acting and trans-acting regulatory effects across defined mouse genetic backgrounds and tissues, establish-ing patterns of regulatory variation at the tissue level. Be-cause these approaches relied on bulk tissue assays, they cap-ture gene expression as an aggregate signal across heteroge-neous cell populations. As a result, the extent to which cis-and trans-acting regulatory variation operates at cell-type-specific resolution and how these patterns generalize across diverse genetic backgrounds remains largely unexplored in the mouse. A powerful resource for enabling genetic diversity stud-ies in a controlled system is the recombinant inbred Collab-       

> Weber et al. |bioR χiv |April 2, 2026 |1–24

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint orative Cross (CC) mouse panel 23 . The eight CC founder mice include five laboratory-derived strains, including the most commonly used laboratory strain C57BL/6J (B6J), A/J (AJ), NOD/ShiLtJ (NODJ), 129S1/SvImJ (129S1J), and NZO/HlLtJ (NZOJ), as well as three wild-derived strains: WSB/EiJ (WSBJ), PWK/PhJ (PWKJ), and CAST/EiJ (CASTJ). Together, these eight CC founder mice capture over 90% of the genetic diversity present in Mus musculus 24–26 .We have previously investigated gene-expression variation across the Collaborative Cross founder strains by generating a large single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) dataset spanning eight core tissues and all eight founders, identify-ing widespread, cell-type-specific transcriptional differences dependent on genetic background 25 .Expanding on this map of genetic diversity, we present a snRNA-seq resource of seven F1 hybrid mice generated by crossing B6J dams with the other seven CC founder mice. By integrating these data with our existing founder dataset, we enable a high-resolution dissection of the cis- and trans-acting regulatory variation underlying expression differences across strains. This consolidated atlas spans 15 genotypes, 8 core tissues, and 92 distinct cell types and states. Our analysis reveals widespread, cell-type-specific regulatory architecture that is highly dependent on both tissue context and genetic background. 

Results 

A multi-tissue single-cell resource enables cis- and trans-regulatory inference. We generated a snRNA-seq dataset from F1 mice using combinatorial split-pool barcod-ing, designed for integrative analysis with our existing CC founder dataset (Rebboah et al., 2025) to quantify cis- and trans-acting regulatory variation (Fig 1A,B). Whereas the founder dataset captures gene expression variation across in-bred parental strains, the F1 dataset enables allele-specific ex-pression measurements required to disentangle cis- and trans-acting effects. The F1 dataset comprises seven genotypes generated by crossing B6J dams with sires from each of the remaining seven CC founder strains, along with eight addi-tional B6J samples that allow us to compare to the original experiment (Fig S1A). In contrast to the founder dataset, in which each tissue was distributed across two split-pool bar-coding plates, the F1 dataset was generated with one tissue per plate (Fig S1B). A total of eight combinatorial barcoding plates were used to generate the dataset, sequenced with 177 billion short reads across 8 million nominal nuclei. Following ambient RNA removal with CellBender 27 

and quality control filtering, we recovered 5,346,886 nu-clei. Across all eight genotypes and replicates, we recov-ered 780,686 adrenal gland, 613,914 cortex/hippocampus, 898,485 diencephalon/pituitary gland, 812,051 gastrocne-mius, 549,058 female gonad, 309,543 male gonad, 95,425 heart, 707,040 kidney, and 580,684 liver nuclei. When in-tegrated with our previously generated CC founder dataset, the combined dataset spans 637,460 to 1,863,454 nuclei per tissue (Fig S1C). Allele-specific expression in F1 mice can be mea-sured for genes that contain single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the non-B6J allele. The eight CC founder parental mouse strains are comprised of five laboratory strains (B6J, AJ, NODJ, 129S1J, and NZOJ) and three wild-derived strains (WSBJ, PWKJ, and CASTJ), and contain 5.9–22.9 mil-lion SNPs compared to the B6J reference mouse strain (Fig 1C) 28 . Across the seven non-B6J founder strains, 60–90% of genes contain at least one SNP relative to B6J, with substantial inter-strain variation (Fig S1D). More divergent strains, particularly PWKJ and CASTJ, contain SNPs in nearly all protein-coding genes, providing broad power for allele-specific expression quantification. We collected both total body weight (Fig S2A) and the weight of each of the nine tissues (Fig S2B-J) for each repli-cate of the F1 mouse genotypes and the repeat B6J mice and compared them to the weights of the parental strain tissues in the founder strains 25 . B6J-NZOJ and B6J-WSBJ F1 mice exhibited intermediate body weights compared with both par-ents. Both B6J-PWKJ F1 and PWKJ mice had smaller body weights compared with B6J, and CASTJ mice had smaller body weights than either B6J or their F1. Notably, we ob-served that female gonads of F1 mice were significantly heav-ier than either parent, with the exception of B6J-AJ F1 mice, which showed no difference in female gonad weight (Fig S2F). Broadly, these results reveal that the inheritance of tis-sue mass is not uniform. While the liver demonstrates ad-ditive phenotypes, other tissues, notably the male and fe-male gonads and gastrocnemius, exhibit non-additive effects, with weights in the F1 mice exceeding those of either par-ent. Overall, these results demonstrate a range of both ad-ditive and non-additive weight phenotypes present between parental and F1 mouse genotypes. To quantify allele-specific expression in each of the seven F1 crosses, we generated a reference genome con-taining both the B6J and non-B6J allele for each respective cross. Briefly, we generated a strain-specific version of the mm39 reference genome by swapping nucleotides overlap-ping SNPs for the non-reference allele using g2gtools (see Methods). The strain-specific reference genome was then concatenated with the standard mm39 reference genome to generate a reference containing both alleles for a given F1 cross. For each parental-F1 trio, we mapped both parents and the F1 to the concatenated reference using kb-python 29 

to quantify allele-specific counts. We performed quality con-trol and cell-type annotation using single-genome mappings to mm39 in order to maximize read mapping and ensure a standardized pipeline across all genetic backgrounds. Us-ing these single-genome mappings, we annotated 92 cell types and states, 14 fewer than previously reported in Reb-boah et al., 2025, due to the consolidation of closely re-lated cell states. For convenient exploration of results, a con-tainerized, interactive data viewer can be downloaded from 

https://github.com/mortazavilab/mousaic .

Cell-type specificity of regulatory composition. Using strain-specific mappings for the parental strains and allele-specific mappings for the F1 hybrids, we estimated cis-acting and trans-acting contributions to gene expression variability            

> 2|bioR χiv Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation
> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 1. A multi-tissue, multi-strain single-nucleus RNA-seq dataset for inferring regulatory variation. (A) Schematic representation of cis-acting and trans-acting genetic variants. (B) Overview of the dataset across eight tissue groups, 15 genotypes, and eight replicates. (C) Genetic variation present among the eight CC founder strains. (D) Bulk whole-tissue regulatory assignments in seven parental-F1 trios. (E–H) Log 2fold change in expression between parents ( RP) by proportion cis for each gene in a cell type. Stacked bar plots depict the breakdown of regulatory assignments for each cell type: (E) liver hepatocytes in B6J-CASTJ trios, (F) liver hepatocytes in B6J-WSBJ trios, (G) diencephalon/pituitary astrocytes in B6J-CASTJ trios, and (H) diencephalon/pituitary astrocytes in B6J-WSBJ trios.

using the XgeneR package 30 . This framework utilizes gen-eralized linear models (GLMs) to quantify regulatory dif-ferences between parental strains using parental and hybrid allele-specific expression data. XgeneR fits a negative bi-nomial GLM to both parental expression and hybrid allele-specific expression, with weights modeling cis- and trans-acting regulatory differences. It then tests whether these weights are significantly different from zero using likelihood ratio tests, and genes are classified as being regulated differ-ently in parental strains primarily as cis-acting, trans-acting, or a combination (cis+trans- or cis ×trans-acting) based on the results of the two significance tests. A gene is classified as conserved if neither the cis-acting effect nor the trans-acting effect are significantly different from zero. Cis+trans-acting and cis ×trans-acting effects are classified if both the cis-acting and trans-acting effects are significant, and are then as-signed based on the direction of gene expression divergence. While assigning genes to discrete classification groups pro-vides a useful summary for comparing cell types and tissues, it does not capture the full continuum of regulatory architec-ture. Hallgrímsdóttir et al., 2024 also introduced a proportion cis metric, which quantifies the relative contribution of cis-acting versus trans-acting regulation to differences in parental expression and can be analyzed alongside the coarser regula-tory assignments. To determine regulatory composition at the whole-tissue level, we applied XgeneR to pseudobulked profiles of nine core tissues in each of the seven parental-F1 trios (Fig 1D). Across all regulatory classes, we observed greater variabil-ity in regulatory proportions across tissues than across geno-types. Conserved regulation was detected most frequently in all tissues, comprising on average 58–76% of genes, with the lowest proportion observed in the cortex and hippocam-pus and the highest in male gonads. Among non-conserved genes, cis-acting variation was the predominant class (60% on average), followed by trans-acting variation (29% on av-erage), with the notable exception of B6J-PWKJ trios in gas-trocnemius, where trans-acting effects exceeded cis-acting.       

> Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv |3

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint In contrast, cis ×trans and cis+trans assignments were rare at bulk-tissue resolution. While whole-tissue regulatory profiles aggregate diverse cell populations, single-cell resolution reveals distinct ar-chitectures based on tissue composition. We first exam-ined the relationship between cell-type abundance and bulk-tissue concordance using hepatocytes, the dominant cell type in the liver at approximately 80% composition, and astro-cytes, a relatively minor population at approximately 14% composition in the diencephalon (Fig. 1E-H). Hepatocytes showed high regulatory conservation, with 60% in CASTJ trios and 67% in WSBJ trios, and strong concordance with bulk liver results ( 83% sharing; Fig S3A,B). In contrast, as-trocytes displayed lower conservation (33–39%) and sharply diverged from bulk diencephalon profiles (32–35% sharing; Fig S3C,D). This trend extended to other populations: liver cholangiocytes, a minor population, showed even less sharing with bulk liver (Fig S3E,F), while glutamatergic neurons, a more abundant brain population, showed higher bulk concor-dance than astrocytes (Fig S3G,H). Across all eight compar-isons, regulatory patterns were more similar within a given cell type across strains than between different cell types, sug-gesting that cellular identity is the primary driver of regula-tory architecture. 

Variation of cis-acting and trans-acting effects be-tween brain regions in B6J-CASTJ trios. To explore how cis- and trans-acting effects vary across biological contexts, we focused on two functionally distinct brain regions: the cortex and hippocampus, which are essential to learning and memory, and the diencephalon, including the pituitary gland, which serves as a regulator of the nervous and endocrine systems. While these regions share several overlapping cell types, their divergent roles provide a tractable context for comparing regulatory architecture between shared cell types across tissues. We focused on B6J-CASTJ parental-F1 trios, which represent the most genetically divergent mouse cross in our dataset. Additionally, the established behavioral and neurological differences between these strains provide a compelling biological context for comparing their regulatory landscapes 31,32 .Across both regions, the regulatory assignment of most genes in most cell types was classified as conserved. No-table exceptions were observed in non-neuronal cell types, including microglia in both regions, as well as astrocytes, mature oligodendrocytes, and endothelial cells of the dien-cephalon, where non-conserved regulatory classes comprised a larger fraction of genes (Fig 2A,B). Among genes with non-conserved regulation, cis-acting variation predominated in cortex and hippocampus cell types and in most diencephalon cell types, with exceptions including astrocytes, oligoden-drocyte precursor cells, and microglia of the diencephalon. This increased regulatory divergence in microglia is notable given their high degree of cellular plasticity and sensitivity to the local environment compared with other neuronal cell types 33 . Consistent with this pattern, diencephalon cell types contained a higher proportion of cis ×trans (compensatory) regulatory assignments compared to cortex and hippocampus cell types. Importantly, in both tissues, differences in regu-latory composition were not driven by the number of genes included in each analysis, as cell types with markedly differ-ent gene counts did not show a consistent trend in regulatory composition. We next focused on microglial cells and glutamatergic neurons, two well-defined cell types, to examine regional differences in cis- and trans-regulatory architecture. Over-all, both microglial cells and glutamatergic neurons showed similar numbers of genes with non-conserved regulatory assignment between tissues (Fig 2C,D). Between the cor-tex/hippocampus and diencephalon, 1,558 genes were com-monly detected in microglial cells and 9,135 genes in glu-tamatergic neurons across both brain regions. For both mi-croglial cells and glutamatergic neurons, the majority of genes retained the same regulatory assignments between tis-sues (Fig 2E,F). Among genes that differed in regulatory as-signment between regions, transition frequency between or-thogonal regulatory assignments (cis-acting and trans-acting) was higher in microglial cells than in glutamatergic neurons. Across tissues, in microglial cells, genes classified as cis-or trans-acting transitioned to cis ×trans regulation 5.7-fold more frequently than they switched between cis and trans. In contrast, in glutamatergic neurons the opposite pattern was observed, with switches between cis and trans occurring approximately twofold more frequently than transitions to cis ×trans. Glutamatergic neurons demonstrated a higher de-gree of concordance in regulatory assignments compared to microglial cells, sharing 59% of regulatory assignments com-pared to 55% in microglial cells. These results indicate that regulatory assignments are largely conserved across brain re-gions, but also include tissue-specific transitions. To illustrate how these regulatory assignments manifest at the level of individual genes, we examined representative examples of stable and context-dependent regulation in mi-croglia and glutamatergic neurons. Regulatory variation was visualized along a cis-acting–trans-acting axis for all genes in diencephalic microglia and glutamatergic neurons, where the proportion cis provides a continuous measure of regu-latory mode contribution (Fig. 2G,H). Complementing this continuous representation, we next examined representative gene-level examples. For example, Gsap , a gene implicated in amyloid-β biology, and the master regulator Spi1 both exhibited cis-acting regulation of similar magnitude in the cortex/hippocampus and diencephalon (Fig. 2I,J). Similarly, 

Olfml3 , a secreted glycoprotein and microglia marker 34 , pro-vides an example of consistent trans-acting regulation across both brain regions (Fig. 2K). We next examined specific genes in glutamatergic neu-rons to illustrate changes in regulatory assignment across tis-sues. While Gsap remained classified as cis-acting in neu-rons across both regions, it exhibited a directional shift be-tween microglia and glutamatergic neurons. The B6J allele showed higher expression in microglia, whereas the CASTJ allele showed higher expression in glutamatergic neurons (Fig 2I,L). Furthermore, we observed instances of regula-tory class switching between tissues. Dcc , which mediates                  

> 4|bioR χiv Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation
> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 2. Cell-type resolved regulatory assignments in the cortex/hippocampus and diencephalon/pituitary gland. Proportion bar plots of genes in each regu-latory category per cell type in the cortex/hippocampus (A) and the diencephalon/pituitary gland (B). Number of genes assigned to each regulatory category in the cor-tex/hippocampus and diencephalon for microglia (C) and glutamatergic neurons (D). Sankey diagrams showing the switches in regulatory assignments between the cor-tex/hippocampus (left) and diencephalon (right) for microglia (1,558 shared genes) (E) and glutamatergic neurons (9,135 shared genes) (F). Proportion cis plots and stacked bar plots depicting regulatory assignment proportions in the diencephalon for microglia (G) and glutamatergic neurons (H). RP= parental log 2fold change. Pseudobulked gene expression of B6J and CASTJ parental strains and allele-specific expression of B6J–CASTJ F1s, shown for microglia (I–K; Gsap ,Spi1 ,Olfml3 ) and glutamatergic neurons (L–N; Gsap ,Dcc ,Phldb2 ).

axon pathfinding in thalamocortical projections, switched from conserved in the diencephalon to cis-acting in the cor-tex/hippocampus (Fig. 2M). Conversely, Phldb2 , a gene re-quired for projection stabilization, showed trans-acting regu-lation in cortex/hippocampus but cis-acting regulation in the diencephalon (Fig 2N). These examples highlight that even within a single cell type, the genetic architecture underly-ing gene expression variability can be remodeled in a tissue-dependent manner. 

Broad regulatory variation across diverse cell types in B6J-CASTJ trios. To determine the distribution of regula-tory patterns across the full cellular landscape, we next ex-amined global patterns of cis-acting and trans-acting regula-tory variation across all cell types in our dataset within B6J-CASTJ trios. We first examined pairwise relationships be-tween regulatory class proportions across cell types (Fig 3A). Because cis+trans additive regulation was consistently rare in all cell types, we focused this analysis on conserved, cis-acting, trans-acting, and cis ×trans-acting regulatory classes. Across the 126 cell type–tissue combinations included in the analysis, regulatory composition varied substantially in a cell-type-specific manner (Fig S4). The proportion of conserved regulation ranged from 32% in diencephalic mi-croglia to 90% in diencephalic choroid plexus epithelial cells (Fig 3A,B). The proportion of cis-acting genes ranged from 4% in heart adipocytes to 34% in adrenal endothelial cells. Cis ×trans-acting regulation displayed a slightly wider range of variability, ranging from 1% in diencephalic choroid plexus cells to 36% in kidney endothelial cells. Trans-acting variation showed the least variability overall, with most cell types falling between 3% in heart adipocytes and 14% in liver cholangiocytes. Together, these results reveal extensive cell-type-specific variation in regulatory composition that is not apparent in analyses of bulk tissues. Because these proportions are compositional, such that       

> Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv |5

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 3. Regulatory variation across diverse cell types in B6J–CASTJ F1 trios. (A) Pairwise scatter plots showing proportion of regulatory assignments across nine tissues, encompassing 126 unique cell-type-tissue combinations. ρ indicates the Spearman correlation coefficient. (B) Stacked proportion bar plots of the top ten and bottom ten cell types by conserved proportion, with color of the cell-type text indicating its tissue of origin. (C) Proportions of regulatory assignments are plotted across 20 quantiles of absolute parental log 2 fold change ( RP ). The black line indicates the global mean across all cell types. (D) Regulatory sharing between 6,730 cell-type pairs. (E) Distribution of promoter SNP density across levels of cis-regulatory conservation. Genes are binned by the fraction of cell types showing cis-acting effects. SNP density represents the proportion of SNPs within the proximal promoter region of the transcription start site (TSS). Mann–Whitney U test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction (* q < 0.05 ), with significance relative to the first bin. (F) Per-gene regulatory class fraction across 126 cell type–tissue combinations, grouped by IMPC knockout viability. Mann–Whitney U test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction (* q < 0.05 , ** q < 0.01 , *** q < 0.001 ). 

all proportions sum to one, correlations between regulatory classes are not independent but can nonetheless reveal struc-tured relationships across cell types. As expected, cis-acting and cis ×trans-acting proportions varied inversely with con-served regulation. However, cis ×trans proportions showed little direct association with either cis-acting or trans-acting proportions, indicating that cis ×trans regulation does not simply scale with the prevalence of cis-acting or trans-acting 

6 | bioR χiv Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint effects (Fig 3A). In contrast, trans-acting proportions showed little association with conserved regulation, remaining rel-atively stable across a wide range of non-conserved pro-portions, consistent with trans-acting regulation contribut-ing a comparatively stable background component. Because more abundant cell types contain more nuclei, they may have greater power to detect regulatory differences. Consistent with this expectation, analysis of the relationship between the number of nuclei included in cell-type pseudobulk profiles and conserved proportions revealed a significant but weak correlation (Fig S5). In addition to the low levels of conservation observed in diencephalic microglia, we found that microglia of the cortex and hippocampus similarly showed low conservation (Fig 3B). Three of the ten least conserved cell types were en-dothelial cells from different tissue groups. Together, these findings demonstrate that cell-type identity is a fundamental factor shaping how genetic variation impacts the regulatory landscape. 

Cell-type-specificity of regulatory variation. Having characterized how regulatory classes are distributed and re-lated across cell types, we next examined properties not cap-tured by compositional relationships. We first compared the magnitude of gene expression changes associated with each regulatory class by binning absolute parental log 2 fold changes between B6J and CASTJ (Fig 3C). Small expression differences were preferentially associated with cis ×trans reg-ulation, consistent with compensatory effects, whereas trans-acting variation contributed primarily to moderate expression differences and showed little contribution to large-magnitude changes. In contrast, cis-acting variation contributed to the full range of expression differences and accounted for nearly all of the largest-magnitude changes, consistent with cis-regulatory variation contributing disproportionately to large heritable expression effect sizes 35,36 .We next quantified cell-type specificity across regula-tory classes by comparing regulatory assignments using Jac-card similarity between pairs of cell types sharing at least 50 non-conserved genes (Fig 3D). Across 6,730 cell-type pairs, cis-acting variation was more frequently shared between cell types than cis ×trans-acting or trans-acting variation, with trans-acting effects showing the highest degree of cell-type specificity. This trend was broadly consistent between indi-vidual cell-type pairs (Fig S6). Notably, we observed inter-tissue variability in regulatory sharing between cell types, with gastrocnemius cell types having relatively high sharing of genes regulated by both cis-acting and trans-acting varia-tion, a trend that was consistent across all parental-F1 trios (Fig S7). These results demonstrate that trans-acting regu-lation is strongly cell-type-specific, likely reflecting differ-ences in cell-type-specific regulatory environments, whereas cis-acting variation is encoded in local regulatory elements and is more broadly shared across cell types. Having established that trans-acting and cis ×trans-acting variation is more cell-type-specific than cis-acting variation, we next sought to identify properties underlying this difference. We hypothesized that genes classified as cis-acting across many cell types are driven by sequence varia-tion in promoter-like elements. To test this, we considered genes detected in at least 33 cell types, and binned genes by the fraction of cell types in which they were classified as cis-acting. We then compared this fraction to SNP burden in the promoter region nearest to the transcription start site (Fig 3E). Genes more consistently classified as cis-acting across cell types exhibited a higher promoter SNP burden, suggest-ing that mutations in core promoter elements contribute to regulatory effects that are broadly shared across cellular con-texts. 

Selective constraint shapes regulatory variation across cell types. Next, we examined the relationship be-tween regulatory conservation and gene essentiality by as-sessing loss-of-function tolerance across regulatory classes 37 

(Fig 3F). Of the genes included in our analysis, 7,088 had available knockout viability annotations. We restricted this set to genes detected in at least 33 cell types, and compared the fraction of cell types in which each gene was assigned to a given regulatory class with its knockout viability category (viable, sub-viable, or lethal). Genes classified as conserved were more frequently observed among sub-viable and lethal categories, whereas non-conserved regulatory classes includ-ing cis-acting, trans-acting, and cis ×trans-acting genes were more frequently observed among knockout-viable genes, with progressively lower representation in sub-viable and lethal categories. Notably, cis ×trans-acting genes showed no significant difference between viable and sub-viable cate-gories but were depleted among lethal genes, indicating that cis ×trans regulation is tolerated in genes with partial con-straint but is reduced in genes under the strongest selective pressure (Fig S8). Together, these findings support a model in which genes central to development and core biological pro-cesses are subject to stronger selective constraint and there-fore exhibit reduced mutational tolerance. To further relate regulatory conservation to gene-level functional properties, we compared our results with cell-type specificity metrics for cortex and hippocampus cell types from Swarna et al., 2025 (Fig S9). ζ is a measure of how specifically a gene’s expression is concentrated in one or a few cell types versus being distributed across many cell types. Genes with low ζ, corresponding to broad expression, were enriched for conserved expression patterns, whereas genes with higher ζ demonstrated increasing proportions of non-conserved regulation (Fig. S9A). Genes were classified as cell-type-specific if their ψblock value for a given cell type, a measure of specificity to that cell type, was greater than 0.9. We restricted this analysis to cell types with at least 80 cell-type-specific genes. Genes in these cell types were enriched for non-conserved regulatory classes, with the exception of microglia (Fig. S9B,C). These analyses indicate that genes expressed in a cell-type-specific manner experience reduced selective constraint and therefore may tolerate greater regu-latory variation. 

Cross-trio analysis reveals increased cis-acting vari-ation in more divergent crosses. Having established the         

> Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv |7
> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 4. Landscape of cis- and trans-acting variation in seven parental–F1 trios. (A, B) Proportion bar plots showing the regulatory composition of glutamatergic neurons (A) and microglia (B) across seven parental–F1 trios. (C) Box plots (top) showing the proportion of genes within each regulatory class across all cell types for seven mouse strains, with significance relative to the AJ (

p < 0.01 , Mann–Whitney U test). The corresponding divergence for each strain (bottom) is expressed as the ∆ in cell-type proportions relative to the AJ baseline. (D) Enrichment of observed cis ×trans-acting variation relative to expected frequency. Box plots show distribution across all cell types in each tissue. (E) Mean number of strains a gene shares a regulatory assignment in for each cell type for cis-, cis ×trans-, and trans-acting assignments. (F) Overall average of regulatory assignments across all cell types. (G) Number of parental–F1 trios a gene shares a regulatory assignment in for mature oligodendrocytes of the diencephalon. (H, I) Heatmaps of parental and hybrid log 2 fold changes for genes with shared regulatory assignments across all seven parental–F1 trios, including 14 genes with shared cis-acting (H) and 45 genes with shared cis ×trans-acting (I) assignments. 

diversity of regulatory variation across cell types and tissues in B6J-CASTJ trios, we next examined how regulatory archi-tecture varies across diverse genetic backgrounds. We first focused on microglia and glutamatergic neurons, two cell types analyzed extensively above, and compared regulatory composition across all seven parental-F1 trios (Fig 4A,B). In glutamatergic neurons, the proportion of conserved genes ranged from 62% in 129S1J trios to 50% in PWKJ trios, with cis-acting variation consistently representing the largest non-conserved class (Fig 4A). In microglial cells, conservation varied more widely, ranging from 67–68% in AJ, NZOJ, and 129S1J trios to 40% in CASTJ trios (Fig 4B). In contrast to conservation, both cis-acting and cis ×trans-acting variation varied substantially across trios, with CASTJ trios exhibiting the highest proportion of cis ×trans regulation. Across both cell types, trans-acting variation showed the least variability between genetic backgrounds. To assess how genetic background influences regula-tory composition globally across cell types, we compared cell-type-level proportions of each regulatory class across the seven parental-F1 trios, using AJ trios as a reference because they are the least genetically divergent from B6J (Fig 4C). Among domesticus subspecies trios, we observed no signif-icant differences in the proportions of any regulatory class relative to AJ. In contrast, PWKJ and CASTJ trios exhibited significantly lower proportion of conserved regulation, with average decreases of 6.0% and 7.2%, respectively, accompa-nied by increased cis-acting variation. Notably, no signifi-  

> 8|bioR

χiv Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint cant differences were detected in cis ×trans- or trans-acting proportions relative to AJ, suggesting that cis-acting varia-tion preferentially drives divergence with increased genetic distance. 

Regulatory class sharing between crosses suggests shared regulatory mechanisms. We investigated whether the classification of genes as cis ×trans-acting occurs inde-pendently of individual cis- and trans-acting variation levels. To test this, we calculated the ratio of observed cis ×trans in-teractions to the number expected based solely on the sep-arate frequencies of cis-acting and trans-acting variants for each cell type across tissues (Fig 4D). This analysis re-vealed that across all seven crosses, cis ×trans-acting vari-ation occurred significantly more frequently than expected given cis- or trans-acting levels. We found that this enrich-ment varied largely by tissue rather than by strain; gonads and heart showed the strongest signals, while liver and skele-tal muscle showed the lowest. These results suggest that cis ×trans-acting variation reflects distinct tissue-level evolu-tionary pressures. Because our dataset spans seven genetically distinct parental-F1 crosses, it enables direct comparison of regula-tory sharing across genetic backgrounds. For each regula-tory class, we calculated the average number of strains in which a gene shared the same regulatory assignment within a given cell type (Fig 4E). Genes classified as cis-acting were more frequently shared across strains than genes classified as cis ×trans- or trans-acting. Across cell types, mature oligo-dendrocytes of the diencephalon showed the highest overall degree of regulatory sharing, followed by endothelial cells of the adrenal gland and astrocytes of the diencephalon (Fig 4F). We identified 570 genes that shared a non-conserved reg-ulatory assignment between the seven parental-F1 trios in at least one cell type. Overall, we find moderate levels of regu-latory sharing within cell types across different crosses. Because mature oligodendrocytes exhibited the highest overall degree of regulatory sharing, we used this cell type as a representative case to examine the distribution of genes shared across strains (Fig 4G). As expected, most genes shared regulatory assignments across more than one trio. We identified 14 cis-acting genes and 45 cis ×trans-acting genes that retained the same regulatory assignment across all seven trios. These genes are notable in that they suggest shared regulatory variants among the non-B6J strains, with B6J rep-resenting the divergent allele. Consistent with this interpre-tation, the 14 cis-acting genes shared across all seven trios showed concordant effect directionality in all crosses (Fig 4H). In contrast, the 45 cis ×trans-acting genes exhibited uni-formly small parental log 2 fold changes and consistent hy-brid effect directionality, consistent with compensatory reg-ulatory interactions (Fig 4I). These shared regulatory effects across strains are suggestive of conserved regulatory varia-tion in different genetic backgrounds. 

Discussion 

A major goal of genomics is to characterize the genetic ar-chitecture that governs the effects of genetic variation on gene expression across tissue and cell-type contexts. While we previously established widespread cell-type-specific vari-ation in gene expression between diverse mouse strains 25 ,whether these changes were driven primarily by cis-acting or trans-acting genetic variants remained unresolved. Our clas-sification of gene expression differences into cis-acting and trans-acting components across eight tissue groups and seven mouse parental-hybrid trios reveals that cis-acting variation is the predominant driver of gene expression divergence among cell types, whereas trans-acting effects are more restricted and more tightly coupled to cellular identity. Resolving gene-expression architecture at cell-type res-olution reveals substantial heterogeneity masked by bulk-tissue assays. While bulk-tissue analyses 5, including our own, have highlighted cis-acting variants as the main drivers of expression divergence, cell-type-resolved analysis uncov-ers a much more heterogeneous regulatory landscape. For example, while cis-acting effects are frequently the largest non-conserved mode of regulation, certain cell types ex-hibit notably higher proportions of trans-acting or cis ×trans-acting variation. Furthermore, our observation that cis-acting variation expands with genetic distance while trans-acting effects remain relatively stable is consistent with re-cent re-evaluations of how regulatory architecture diverges with evolutionary distance 5. Ultimately, these results em-phasize that a complete characterization of genetic diver-sity requires moving beyond aggregate bulk-tissue or whole-organism measures to account for the diverse regulatory land-scape present across individual cell types and distinct genetic backgrounds. We find that genes with cis-acting effects are more likely to be detected in multiple cell types than are trans-acting or cis ×trans-acting compensatory interactions. This observa-tion underscores a difference in regulatory logic: cis-acting variants are encoded locally in the genome, potentially mod-ifying cis-regulatory elements and altering the expression of nearby genes, whereas the action of trans-acting variants de-pends on a cell’s regulatory environment. For example, a genetic variant that changes the expression of a transcrip-tion factor can have downstream propagated effects on tar-get gene expression only if that transcription factor is tran-scribed and translated in a particular cellular context 39 . By contrast, a mutation that disrupts a core binding motif within a gene’s promoter may exert a constitutive effect regard-less of cellular context. This observation of cell-type speci-ficity is consistent with the omnigenic model, which pro-poses that gene expression is shaped by networks of trans-acting peripheral genes, with the influence of these networks filtered through cell-type-specific regulatory environments 2.More broadly, these results highlight that the effects of ge-netic variation are inherently context-dependent. To fully understand genetic diversity, we must therefore consider the range of factors that define the Gene ×Environment interac-tions to include intrinsic factors such as cell type, tissue con-      

> Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv |9
> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint

text, and anatomical region, along with extrinsic factors such as circadian rhythm, age, and diet. In other words, phe-notype is a product of Gene ×(cell type ×tissue ×anatomical region ×circadian rhythm ×age ×diet × · · · ).We observed a distinct relationship between gene es-sentiality and the mode of regulatory divergence. For genes classified with cis- or trans-acting effects, there is a progres-sive decrease in the frequency of these effects as a gene be-comes more essential, transitioning from viable to sub-viable and ultimately to lethal. Notably, cis ×trans-acting compen-satory effects were significantly depleted among lethal genes but maintained similar frequencies between sub-viable and viable categories. This suggests that while viable and sub-viable genes possess the functional flexibility to accumulate compensating regulatory variants, lethal genes are subject to intense selection. Because essential genes have a smaller tol-erance for expression changes, they likely cannot survive the deleterious intermediate states required to eventually accu-mulate a second, compensatory mutation. These results im-ply that once a gene falls below a strict threshold of essen-tiality, it gains the functional slack necessary to acquire sub-sequent compensatory variants. Furthermore, the breadth of conservation observed across our dataset may be further ex-plained by pleiotropic constraint: genes expressed across a wide array of cell types are significantly more likely to ex-hibit conserved expression than genes with cell-type-specific expression, suggesting that multi-contextual roles limit the space for regulatory divergence. It is important to consider that C57BL/6J (B6J), despite its status as the standard laboratory reference strain 40 , has its own private set of variants that are not present in most mice. For example, B6J has been shown to contain a homozy-gous deletion in the Nnt gene, impacting the ability of B6J mice to metabolize exogenous peroxide 41 . Furthermore, B6J mice and other commonly used laboratory mouse strains are melatonin deficient due to two recessive mutations in Hiomt 

and Aanat 42–44 . Across seven hybrid trios, we identified 570 genes that were assigned a non-conserved regulatory class in at least one cell type, indicating that these effects are shared across trios and suggesting that B6J may be an evolution-ary outlier at a subset of loci. For example, in mature oligo-dendrocytes, we identified sets of cis-acting and cis ×trans-acting genes for which all seven non-B6J strains exhibit con-cordant regulatory patterns that diverge from the B6J allele. These findings underscore the necessity of incorporating di-verse mouse subspecies into studies of gene regulation, as ob-servations made in a single mouse strain may reflect lineage-specific features rather than generalizable principles. While expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) map-ping remains the standard approach for identifying genomic loci associated with phenotypic variation in humans and other natural populations, the framework applied here pro-vides a mechanistically complementary approach 45 . Un-like traditional eQTL studies, which require large cohorts and often have limited power to detect trans-acting or compensatory regulatory effects 46 , allele-specific analysis in parental-hybrid crosses enables direct dissection of cis-and trans-regulatory contributions 12 . Historically, eQTL studies have primarily mapped regulatory variation in bulk tissues 47,48 , with more recent extensions to single-cell reso-lution largely restricted to accessible human samples such as blood 49–51 . In contrast, our results demonstrate that resolv-ing regulatory architecture at the level of individual cell types across diverse tissues is essential for capturing the full spec-trum of heritable regulatory variation. Together, these find-ings underscore the need for expanded, cell-type-resolved mouse eQTL resources to fully characterize the genetic ar-chitecture underlying gene-expression variability. 

Data and Code availability 

• IGVF measurement sets for raw fastqs and uniformly pro-cessed AnnData h5ad files are listed in Supp. Table 1. • Notebooks for figure generation, cell type annotation, and data processing are acessible at: github.com/mortazavilab/cistrans_manuscript • A containerized, interactive data viewer can be downloaded from: github.com/mortazavilab/mousaic 

Acknowledgements 

We thank the UCI Transgenic Mouse Facility for housing the mice and use of their facilities and UCI GRTH for sequenc-ing the libraries. The TMF and GRTH are shared resources of the Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, supported in part by the National Cancer Institute of the National Insti-tutes of Health under award number P30CA062203. A.M. and B.J.W. were supported by UM1HG012077. 

Author contributions 

A.M., I.B.H, L.P., and B.J.W. designed the project. S.K. ac-quired mice and oversaw their husbandry. G.F. and H.Y.L. dissected tissues under guidance from B.A.W., G.R.M., and S.K. M.D., P.M., E.T., N.F., N.M., and R.M. helped with sam-ple collection as well as performed nuclei isolation, barcod-ing, and library preparation. D.T. uploaded data and metadata to the IGVF portal. M.C. and E.R. provided input and code for data analysis. R.W. performed data analysis, generated figures, and wrote and edited the manuscript with significant input from A.M. 

Bibliography                                

> 1. Pierrick Wainschtein, Yuanxiang Zhang, Jeremy Schwartzentruber, Irfahan Kassam, Julia Sidorenko, Petko P. Fiziev, Huanwei Wang, Jeremy McRae, Richard Border, Noah Zaitlen, Sriram Sankararaman, Michael E. Goddard, Jian Zeng, Peter M. Visscher, Kyle Kai-How Farh, and Loic Yengo. Estimation and mapping of the missing heritability of human phe-notypes. Nature , 649(8099):1219–1227, January 2026. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi:
> 10.1038/s41586-025-09720-6 .2. Evan A. Boyle, Yang I. Li, and Jonathan K. Pritchard. An Expanded View of Complex Traits: From Polygenic to Omnigenic. Cell , 169(7):1177–1186, June 2017. ISSN 00928674. doi:
> 10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.038 .3. Kyle J. Gaulton, Sebastian Preissl, and Bing Ren. Interpreting non-coding disease-associated human variants using single-cell epigenomics. Nature Reviews Genetics , 24(8): 516–534, August 2023. ISSN 1471-0056, 1471-0064. doi: 10.1038/s41576-023-00598-6 .4. IGVF Consortium. Deciphering the impact of genomic variation on function. Na-ture , 633(8028):47–57, September 2024. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/ s41586-024-07510-0 .
> 10 |bioR χiv Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint 5. Sylvia M Durkin and Michael W Nachman. Intraspecific gene regulation in cis- and trans-.

Evolution , 79(4):499–509, April 2025. ISSN 0014-3820, 1558-5646. doi: 10.1093/evolut/ qpaf014 .6. Bart Deplancke, Daniel Alpern, and Vincent Gardeux. The Genetics of Transcription Factor DNA Binding Variation. Cell , 166(3):538–554, July 2016. ISSN 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j. cell.2016.07.012 .7. Xiaoting Li, Tuuli Lappalainen, and Harmen J. Bussemaker. Identifying genetic regulatory variants that affect transcription factor activity. Cell Genomics , 3(9):100382, September 2023. ISSN 2666979X. doi: 10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100382 .8. Pétra Vande Zande, Mark S. Hill, and Patricia J. Wittkopp. Pleiotropic effects of trans-regulatory mutations on fitness and gene expression. Science , 377(6601):105–109, July 2022. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.abj7185 .9. Sarah A. Signor and Sergey V. Nuzhdin. Compensatory Evolution of Gene Expression. 

Trends in Genetics , 35(12):890–891, December 2019. ISSN 01689525. doi: 10.1016/j.tig. 2019.09.008 .10. Justin M Fear, Luis G León-Novelo, Alison M Morse, Alison R Gerken, Kjong Van Lehmann, John Tower, Sergey V Nuzhdin, and Lauren M McIntyre. Buffering of Genetic Regulatory Networks in Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics , 203(3):1177–1190, July 2016. ISSN 1943-2631. doi: 10.1534/genetics.116.188797 .11. Christian R Landry, Patricia J Wittkopp, Clifford H Taubes, Jose M Ranz, Andrew G Clark, and Daniel L Hartl. Compensatory cis-trans Evolution and the Dysregulation of Gene Ex-pression in Interspecific Hybrids of Drosophila. Genetics , 171(4):1813–1822, December 2005. ISSN 1943-2631. doi: 10.1534/genetics.105.047449 .12. Patricia J. Wittkopp, Belinda K. Haerum, and Andrew G. Clark. Evolutionary changes in cis and trans gene regulation. Nature , 430(6995):85–88, July 2004. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature02698 .13. Brian P.H. Metzger, Patricia J. Wittkopp, and Joseph. D. Coolon. Evolutionary Dynamics of Regulatory Changes Underlying Gene Expression Divergence among Saccharomyces Species. Genome Biology and Evolution , 9(4):843–854, April 2017. ISSN 1759-6653. doi: 

10.1093/gbe/evx035 .14. Bryan A. Ramirez-Corona, Stephanie Fruth, Oluchi Ofoegbu, and Zeba Wunderlich. The mode of expression divergence in Drosophila fat body is infection-specific. Genome Re-search , 31(6):1024–1034, June 2021. ISSN 1088-9051, 1549-5469. doi: 10.1101/gr.269597. 120 .15. Jukka-Pekka Verta and Felicity C Jones. Predominance of cis-regulatory changes in parallel expression divergence of sticklebacks. eLife , 8:e43785, May 2019. ISSN 2050-084X. doi: 

10.7554/eLife.43785 .16. Angela Goncalves, Sarah Leigh-Brown, David Thybert, Klara Stefflova, Ernest Turro, Paul Flicek, Alvis Brazma, Duncan T. Odom, and John C. Marioni. Extensive compensatory cis-trans regulation in the evolution of mouse gene expression. Genome Research , 22(12): 2376–2384, December 2012. ISSN 1088-9051. doi: 10.1101/gr.142281.112 .17. Xiaoli Shi, Danny W-K. Ng, Changqing Zhang, Luca Comai, Wenxue Ye, and Z. Jef-frey Chen. Cis- and trans-regulatory divergence between progenitor species determines gene-expression novelty in Arabidopsis allopolyploids. Nature Communications , 3(1):950, July 2012. ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1954 .18. Susan Q. Shen, Ernest Turro, and Joseph C. Corbo. Hybrid Mice Reveal Parent-of-Origin and Cis- and Trans-Regulatory Effects in the Retina. PLoS ONE , 9(10):e109382, October 2014. ISSN 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109382 .19. Katya L. Mack, Polly Campbell, and Michael W. Nachman. Gene regulation and speciation in house mice. Genome Research , 26(4):451–461, April 2016. ISSN 1088-9051, 1549-5469. doi: 10.1101/gr.195743.115 .20. Mallory A. Ballinger, Katya L. Mack, Sylvia M. Durkin, Eric A. Riddell, and Michael W. Nachman. Environmentally robust cis -regulatory changes underlie rapid climatic adapta-tion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 120(39):e2214614120, September 2023. ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2214614120 .21. Clement Y Chow, Xu Wang, David Riccardi, Mariana F. Wolfner, and Andrew G. Clark. The Genetic Architecture of the Genome-Wide Transcriptional Response to ER Stress in the Mouse. PLOS Genetics , 11(2):e1004924, February 2015. ISSN 1553-7404. doi: 10.1371/ journal.pgen.1004924 .22. Eli Reuveni, Dmitry Getselter, Oded Oron, and Evan Elliott. Differential contribution of cis and trans gene transcription regulatory mechanisms in amygdala and prefrontal cortex and modulation by social stress. Scientific Reports , 8(1):6339, April 2018. ISSN 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-24544-3 .23. The Complex Trait Consortium. The Collaborative Cross, a community resource for the genetic analysis of complex traits. Nature Genetics , 36(11):1133–1137, November 2004. ISSN 1061-4036, 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/ng1104-1133 .24. Collaborative Cross Consortium. The Genome Architecture of the Collaborative Cross Mouse Genetic Reference Population. Genetics , 190(2):389–401, February 2012. ISSN 1943-2631. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.132639 .25. Elisabeth Rebboah, Ryan Weber, Elnaz Abdollahzadeh, Nikhila Swarna, Delaney K. Sulli-van, Diane Trout, Fairlie Reese, Heidi Yahan Liang, Ghassan Filimban, Parvin Mahdipoor, Margaret Duffield, Romina Mojaverzargar, Erisa Taghizadeh, Negar Fattahi, Negar Mojgani, Haoran Zhang, Rebekah K. Loving, Maria Carilli, A. Sina Booeshaghi, Shimako Kawauchi, Ingileif B. Hallgrímsdóttir, Brian A. Williams, Grant R. MacGregor, Lior Pachter, Barbara J. Wold, and Ali Mortazavi. Systematic cell-type resolved transcriptomes of 8 tissues in 8 lab and wild-derived mouse strains capture global and local expression variation. Cell Ge-nomics , page 101108, December 2025. ISSN 2666979X. doi: 10.1016/j.xgen.2025.101108 .26. D. W. Threadgill, D. R. Miller, G. A. Churchill, and F. P.-M. De Villena. The Collaborative Cross: A Recombinant Inbred Mouse Population for the Systems Genetic Era. ILAR Jour-nal , 52(1):24–31, January 2011. ISSN 1084-2020. doi: 10.1093/ilar.52.1.24 .27. Stephen J. Fleming, Mark D. Chaffin, Alessandro Arduini, Amer-Denis Akkad, Eric Banks, John C. Marioni, Anthony A. Philippakis, Patrick T. Ellinor, and Mehrtash Babadi. Unsuper-vised removal of systematic background noise from droplet-based single-cell experiments using CellBender. Nature Methods , 20(9):1323–1335, September 2023. ISSN 1548-7091, 1548-7105. doi: 10.1038/s41592-023-01943-7 .28. Thomas M. Keane, Leo Goodstadt, Petr Danecek, Michael A. White, Kim Wong, Binnaz Yalcin, Andreas Heger, Avigail Agam, Guy Slater, Martin Goodson, Nicholas A. Furlotte, Eleazar Eskin, Christoffer Nellåker, Helen Whitley, James Cleak, Deborah Janowitz, Polinka Hernandez-Pliego, Andrew Edwards, T. Grant Belgard, Peter L. Oliver, Rebecca E. McIn-tyre, Amarjit Bhomra, Jérôme Nicod, Xiangchao Gan, Wei Yuan, Louise Van Der Weyden, Charles A. Steward, Sendu Bala, Jim Stalker, Richard Mott, Richard Durbin, Ian J. Jackson, Anne Czechanski, José Afonso Guerra-Assunção, Leah Rae Donahue, Laura G. Reinholdt, Bret A. Payseur, Chris P. Ponting, Ewan Birney, Jonathan Flint, and David J. Adams. Mouse genomic variation and its effect on phenotypes and gene regulation. Nature , 477(7364): 289–294, September 2011. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature10413 .29. Delaney K. Sullivan, Kyung Hoi Min, Kristján Eldjárn Hjörleifsson, Laura Luebbert, Guil-laume Holley, Lambda Moses, Johan Gustafsson, Nicolas L. Bray, Harold Pimentel, A. Sina Booeshaghi, Páll Melsted, and Lior Pachter. kallisto, bustools and kb-python for quantify-ing bulk, single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq. Nature Protocols , 20(3):587–607, March 2025. ISSN 1754-2189, 1750-2799. doi: 10.1038/s41596-024-01057-0 .30. Ingileif B. Hallgrímsdóttir, Maria Carilli, and Lior Pachter. Estimating cis and trans contribu-tions to differences in gene regulation, July 2024. 31. Peng Jiang, Kathleen M. Franklin, Marilyn J. Duncan, Bruce F. O’Hara, and Jonathan P. Wisor. Distinct Phase Relationships between Suprachiasmatic Molecular Rhythms, Cere-bral Cortex Molecular Rhythms, and Behavioral Rhythms in Early Runner (CAST/EiJ) and Nocturnal (C57BL/6J) Mice. Sleep , 35(10):1385–1394, October 2012. ISSN 0161-8105, 1550-9109. doi: 10.5665/sleep.2120 .32. Isabelle Le Roy, Pierre L Roubertoux, Laure Jamot, Fatima Maarouf, Sylvie Tordjman, Stéphane Mortaud, Caroline Blanchard, Benoit Martin, Pascale-Valérie Guillot, and Vin-cent Duquenne. Neuronal and behavioral differences between Mus musculus domesticus (C57BL/6JBy) and Mus musculus castaneus (CAST/Ei). Behavioural Brain Research , 95 (1):135–142, September 1998. ISSN 01664328. doi: 10.1016/S0166-4328(97)00218-0 .33. Yun-Long Tan, Yi Yuan, and Li Tian. Microglial regional heterogeneity and its role in the brain. Molecular Psychiatry , 25(2):351–367, February 2020. ISSN 1359-4184, 1476-5578. doi: 10.1038/s41380-019-0609-8 .34. Nicolas Neidert, Alexander Von Ehr, Tanja Zöller, and Björn Spittau. Microglia-Specific Expression of Olfml3 Is Directly Regulated by Transforming Growth Factor β1-Induced Smad2 Signaling. Frontiers in Immunology , 9:1728, July 2018. ISSN 1664-3224. doi: 

10.3389/fimmu.2018.01728 .35. Marna McKenzie, Anjali K Henders, Anthony Caracella, Naomi R Wray, and Joseph E Powell. Overlap of expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL) in human brain and blood. 

BMC Medical Genomics , 7(1):31, December 2014. ISSN 1755-8794. doi: 10.1186/ 1755-8794-7-31 .36. Brian P. H. Metzger, Fabien Duveau, David C. Yuan, Stephen Tryban, Bing Yang, and Patri-cia J. Wittkopp. Contrasting Frequencies and Effects of cis - and trans -Regulatory Mutations Affecting Gene Expression. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 33(5):1131–1146, May 2016. ISSN 0737-4038, 1537-1719. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msw011 .37. Tudor Groza, Federico Lopez Gomez, Hamed Haseli Mashhadi, Violeta Muñoz-Fuentes, Osman Gunes, Robert Wilson, Pilar Cacheiro, Anthony Frost, Piia Keskivali-Bond, Bora Vardal, Aaron McCoy, Tsz Kwan Cheng, Luis Santos, Sara Wells, Damian Smedley, Ann-Marie Mallon, and Helen Parkinson. The International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium: comprehensive knockout phenotyping underpinning the study of human disease. Nucleic Acids Research , 51(D1):D1038–D1045, January 2023. ISSN 0305-1048, 1362-4962. doi: 

10.1093/nar/gkac972 .38. Nikhila P Swarna, A Sina Booeshaghi, Elisabeth Rebboah, M Grace Gordon, Pooja Kathail, Taibo Li, Chun Jimmie Ye, Barbara Wold, Ali Mortazavi, and Lior Pachter. Determining gene specificity from multivariate single-cell RNA sequencing data. bioRxiv , 2025. doi: 

10.1101/2025.11.21.689845 .39. Júlia Domingo, Mariia Minaeva, John A Morris, Samuel Ghatan, Marcello Ziosi, Neville E Sanjana, and Tuuli Lappalainen. Nonlinear transcriptional responses to gradual modulation of transcription factor dosage. eLife , 13:RP100555, January 2026. ISSN 2050-084X. doi: 

10.7554/eLife.100555 .40. Kazuyuki Mekada and Atsushi Yoshiki. Substrains matter in phenotyping of C57BL/6 mice. 

Experimental Animals , 70(2):145–160, 2021. ISSN 1341-1357, 1881-7122. doi: 10.1538/ expanim.20-0158 .41. Juliana A. Ronchi, Tiago R. Figueira, Felipe G. Ravagnani, Helena C.F. Oliveira, Anibal E. Vercesi, and Roger F. Castilho. A spontaneous mutation in the nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase gene of C57BL/6J mice results in mitochondrial redox abnormalities. 

Free Radical Biology and Medicine , 63:446–456, October 2013. ISSN 08915849. doi: 

10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.05.049 .42. Maki Goto, Itsuki Oshima, Takeshi Tomita, and Shizufumi Ebihara. Melatonin Content of the Pineal Gland in Different Mouse Strains. Journal of Pineal Research , 7(2):195–204, April 1989. ISSN 0742-3098, 1600-079X. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.1989.tb00667.x .43. Patrick H Roseboom, M A Aryan Namboodiri, Drazen B Zimonjic, Nicholas C Popescu, Ignacio R Rodriguez, Jonathan A Gastel, and David C Klein. Natural melatonin ‘knockdown’ in C57BL/6J mice: rare mechanism truncates serotonin N-acetyltransferase. Molecular Brain Research , 1998. doi: 10.1016/s0169-328x(98)00273-3 .44. Takaoki Kasahara, Kuniya Abe, Kazuyuki Mekada, Atsushi Yoshiki, and Tadafumi Kato. Ge-netic variation of melatonin productivity in laboratory mice under domestication. Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences , 107(14):6412–6417, April 2010. ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0914399107 .45. François Aguet, Kaur Alasoo, Yang I. Li, Alexis Battle, Hae Kyung Im, Stephen B. Mont-gomery, and Tuuli Lappalainen. Molecular quantitative trait loci. Nature Reviews Methods Primers , 3(1):4, January 2023. ISSN 2662-8449. doi: 10.1038/s43586-022-00188-6 .46. Trudy F. C. Mackay, Eric A. Stone, and Julien F. Ayroles. The genetics of quantitative traits: challenges and prospects. Nature Reviews Genetics , 10(8):565–577, August 2009. ISSN 1471-0056, 1471-0064. doi: 10.1038/nrg2612 .47. GTEx Consortium. The GTEx Consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across human tissues. Science , 2020. doi: 10.1126/science.aaz1776 .48. Jingfei Zhang and Hongyu Zhao. eQTL studies: from bulk tissues to single cells. Journal of Genetics and Genomics , 50(12):925–933, December 2023. ISSN 16738527. doi: 10.1016/ j.jgg.2023.05.003 .

Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv | 11 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint 49. Prashant S. Emani, Jason J. Liu, Declan Clarke, Matthew Jensen, Jonathan Warrell, Chirag Gupta, Ran Meng, Che Yu Lee, Siwei Xu, Cagatay Dursun, Shaoke Lou, Yuhang Chen, Zhiyuan Chu, Timur Galeev, Ahyeon Hwang, Yunyang Li, Pengyu Ni, Xiao Zhou, Psy-chENCODE Consortium‡, Trygve E. Bakken, Jaroslav Bendl, Lucy Bicks, Tanima Chat-terjee, Lijun Cheng, Yuyan Cheng, Yi Dai, Ziheng Duan, Mary Flaherty, John F. Fullard, Michael Gancz, Diego Garrido-Martín, Sophia Gaynor-Gillett, Jennifer Grundman, Natalie Hawken, Ella Henry, Gabriel E. Hoffman, Ao Huang, Yunzhe Jiang, Ting Jin, Nikolas L. Jorstad, Riki Kawaguchi, Saniya Khullar, Jianyin Liu, Junhao Liu, Shuang Liu, Shaojie Ma, Michael Margolis, Samantha Mazariegos, Jill Moore, Jennifer R. Moran, Eric Nguyen, Nishigandha Phalke, Milos Pjanic, Henry Pratt, Diana Quintero, Ananya S. Rajagopalan, Tiernon R. Riesenmy, Nicole Shedd, Manman Shi, Megan Spector, Rosemarie Terwilliger, Kyle J. Travaglini, Brie Wamsley, Gaoyuan Wang, Yan Xia, Shaohua Xiao, Andrew C. Yang, Suchen Zheng, Michael J. Gandal, Donghoon Lee, Ed S. Lein, Panos Roussos, Nenad Ses-tan, Zhiping Weng, Kevin P. White, Hyejung Won, Matthew J. Girgenti, Jing Zhang, Daifeng Wang, Daniel Geschwind, Mark Gerstein, Schahram Akbarian, Alexej Abyzov, Nadav Ahi-tuv, Dhivya Arasappan, Jose Juan Almagro Armenteros, Brian J. Beliveau, Sabina Berretta, Rahul A. Bharadwaj, Arjun Bhattacharya, Kristen Brennand, Davide Capauto, Frances A. Champagne, Chris Chatzinakos, H. Isaac Chen, Lijun Cheng, Andrew Chess, Jo-fan Chien, Ashley Clement, Leonardo Collado-Torres, Gregory M. Cooper, Gregory E. Crawford, Rujia Dai, Nikolaos P. Daskalakis, Jose Davila-Velderrain, Amy Deep-Soboslay, Chengyu Deng, Christopher P. DiPietro, Stella Dracheva, Shiron Drusinsky, Duc Duong, Nicholas J. Ea-gles, Jonathan Edelstein, Kiki Galani, Kiran Girdhar, Fernando S. Goes, William Greenleaf, Hanmin Guo, Qiuyu Guo, Yoav Hadas, Joachim Hallmayer, Xikun Han, Vahram Haroutu-nian, Chuan He, Stephanie C. Hicks, Marcus Ho, Li-Lun Ho, Yiling Huang, Louise A. Huuki-Myers, Thomas M. Hyde, Artemis Iatrou, Fumitaka Inoue, Aarti Jajoo, Lihua Jiang, Peng Jin, Connor Jops, Alexandre Jourdon, Manolis Kellis, Joel E. Kleinman, Steven P. Kleopoulos, Alex Kozlenkov, Arnold Kriegstein, Anshul Kundaje, Soumya Kundu, Junhao Li, Mingfeng Li, Xiao Lin, Shuang Liu, Chunyu Liu, Jacob M. Loupe, Dan Lu, Liang Ma, Jessica Mar-iani, Keri Martinowich, Kristen R. Maynard, Richard M. Myers, Courtney Micallef, Tatiana Mikhailova, Guo-li Ming, Shahin Mohammadi, Emma Monte, Kelsey S. Montgomery, Eran A. Mukamel, Angus C. Nairn, Charles B. Nemeroff, Scott Norton, Tomasz Nowakowski, Lars-son Omberg, Stephanie C. Page, Saejeong Park, Ashok Patowary, Reenal Pattni, Geo Pertea, Mette A. Peters, Dalila Pinto, Sirisha Pochareddy, Katherine S. Pollard, Alex Pollen, Pawel F. Przytycki, Carolin Purmann, Zhaohui S. Qin, Ping-Ping Qu, Towfique Raj, Sarah Reach, Thomas Reimonn, Kerry J. Ressler, Deanna Ross, Joel Rozowsky, Misir Ruth, W. Brad Ruzicka, Stephan J. Sanders, Juliane M. Schneider, Soraya Scuderi, Robert Se-bra, Nicholas Seyfried, Zhiping Shao, Annie W. Shieh, Joo Heon Shin, Mario Skarica, Clara Snijders, Hongjun Song, Matthew W. State, Jason Stein, Marilyn Steyert, Sivan Subbu-raju, Thomas Sudhof, Michael Snyder, Ran Tao, Karen Therrien, Li-Huei Tsai, Alexander E. Urban, Flora M. Vaccarino, Harm Van Bakel, Daniel Vo, Georgios Voloudakis, Tao Wang, Sidney H. Wang, Yifan Wang, Yu Wei, Annika K. Weimer, Daniel R. Weinberger, Cindy Wen, Sean Whalen, A. Jeremy Willsey, Wing Wong, Hao Wu, Feinan Wu, Stefan Wuchty, Dennis Wylie, Chloe X. Yap, Biao Zeng, Pan Zhang, Chunling Zhang, Bin Zhang, Yanqiong Zhang, Ryan Ziffra, Zane R. Zeier, and Trisha M. Zintel. Single-cell genomics and regulatory net-works for 388 human brains. Science , 384(6698):eadi5199, May 2024. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.adi5199 .50. LifeLines Cohort Study, BIOS Consortium, Monique G. P. Van Der Wijst, Harm Brugge, Dylan H. De Vries, Patrick Deelen, Morris A. Swertz, and Lude Franke. Single-cell RNA se-quencing identifies celltype-specific cis-eQTLs and co-expression QTLs. Nature Genetics ,50(4):493–497, April 2018. ISSN 1061-4036, 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0089-9 .51. Population-scale multiome immune cell atlas reveals complex disease drivers. 52. Nicolas L Bray, Harold Pimentel, Páll Melsted, and Lior Pachter. Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq quantification. Nature Biotechnology , 34(5):525–527, May 2016. ISSN 1087-0156, 1546-1696. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3519 .53. Páll Melsted, A. Sina Booeshaghi, Lauren Liu, Fan Gao, Lambda Lu, Kyung Hoi Min, Ed-uardo Da Veiga Beltrame, Kristján Eldjárn Hjörleifsson, Jase Gehring, and Lior Pachter. Modular, efficient and constant-memory single-cell RNA-seq preprocessing. Nature Biotechnology , 39(7):813–818, July 2021. ISSN 1087-0156, 1546-1696. doi: 10.1038/ s41587-021-00870-2 .54. Delaney K Sullivan, Kristján Eldjárn Hjörleifsson, Nikhila P Swarna, Conrad Oakes, Guil-laume Holley, Páll Melsted, and Lior Pachter. Accurate quantification of nascent and ma-ture RNAs from single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq. Nucleic Acids Research , 53(1): gkae1137, January 2025. ISSN 0305-1048, 1362-4962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae1137 .55. Samuel L. Wolock, Romain Lopez, and Allon M. Klein. Scrublet: Computational Identifica-tion of Cell Doublets in Single-Cell Transcriptomic Data. Cell Systems , 8(4):281–291.e9, April 2019. ISSN 24054712. doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2018.11.005 .56. Delaney K Sullivan, Mayuko Boffelli, and Lior Pachter. Pseudoassembly of k-mers. bioRxiv ,2025. doi: 10.1101/2025.05.11.653354 .57. F. Alexander Wolf, Philipp Angerer, and Fabian J. Theis. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis. Genome Biology , 19(1):15, December 2018. ISSN 1474-760X. doi: 10.1186/s13059-017-1382-0 .58. Alexander D. Diehl, Terrence F. Meehan, Yvonne M. Bradford, Matthew H. Brush, Wasila M. Dahdul, David S. Dougall, Yongqun He, David Osumi-Sutherland, Alan Ruttenberg, Sirarat Sarntivijai, Ceri E. Van Slyke, Nicole A. Vasilevsky, Melissa A. Haendel, Judith A. Blake, and Christopher J. Mungall. The Cell Ontology 2016: enhanced content, modularization, and ontology interoperability. Journal of Biomedical Semantics , 7(1):44, December 2016. ISSN 2041-1480. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0088-7 .59. Pau Badia-i Mompel, Jesús Vélez Santiago, Jana Braunger, Celina Geiss, Daniel Dim-itrov, Sophia Müller-Dott, Petr Taus, Aurelien Dugourd, Christian H Holland, Ricardo O Ramirez Flores, and Julio Saez-Rodriguez. decoupleR: ensemble of computational meth-ods to infer biological activities from omics data. Bioinformatics Advances , 2(1):vbac016, January 2022. ISSN 2635-0041. doi: 10.1093/bioadv/vbac016 .60. Jill E. Moore, Henry E. Pratt, Kaili Fan, Nishigandha Phalke, Jonathan Fisher, Shaimae I. Elhajjajy, Gregory Andrews, Mingshi Gao, Nicole Shedd, Yu Fu, Matthew C. Lacadie, Jair Meza, Mansi Khandpekar, Mohit Ganna, Eva Choudhury, Ross Swofford, Huong Phan, Christian C. Ramirez, Maxwell Campbell, Mary Likhite, Nina P. Farrell, Annika K. Weimer, Anusri Pampari, Vivekanandan Ramalingam, Fairlie Reese, Beatrice Borsari, Xuezhu Yu, Eve Wattenberg, Marina Ruiz-Romero, Milad Razavi-Mohseni, Jinrui Xu, Timur Galeev, Andres Colubri, Michael A. Beer, Roderic Guigó, Mark B. Gerstein, Jesse M. Engreitz, Mats Ljungman, Timothy E. Reddy, Michael P. Snyder, Charles B. Epstein, Elizabeth Gaskell, Bradley E. Bernstein, Diane E. Dickel, Axel Visel, Len A. Pennacchio, Ali Mortazavi, Anshul Kundaje, and Zhiping Weng. An expanded registry of candidate cis-regulatory elements. 

Nature , January 2026. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09909-9 .61. Endre Bakken Stovner and Pål Sætrom. PyRanges: efficient comparison of genomic in-tervals in Python. Bioinformatics , 36(3):918–919, February 2020. ISSN 1367-4803, 1367-4811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz615 .

12 | bioR χiv Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Methods 

Mice and tissue collection. Mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and housed at the UCI vivarium under controlled conditions. All animal procedures were approved by the UCI Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Metadata for each animal and tissue, including mouse ID, sex, date of birth and euthanasia, time of euthanasia, dissector ID, body and tissue weights, and estrus stage, and zeitgeber time (ZT), defined as the number of hours since lights on (ZT0) are detailed in Supplementary Table 1. Animals were housed in individually ventilated cages (SuperMouse 750, Technoplast, Seaford, DE) containing corncob bedding (Envigo 7092BK 1/8” Teklad, Placentia, CA) and two 2” square cotton nestlets (Ancare, Bellmore, NY) plus a LifeSpan multi-level environmental enrichment platform. Tap water and food (Envigo Mouse 2027; LabDiet, St. Louis, MO) were provided ad libitum. Cages were changed every 2 weeks with a maximum of 5 adult animals per cage. Room temperature was maintained at 72 ± 2°F, with ambient room humidity (average 40–60% RH, range 10–70%). Light cycle was 12h light / 12h dark, lights on at 06:30h and off at 18:30h. Tissue collection was performed as described in Rebboah et al., 2025. Briefly, mice were euthanized via isoflurane anesthesia followed by decapitation. Tissues, including brain regions, trunk organs, and limb muscles were dissected in parallel by expert personnel. All tissues were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -135°C. 

Nuclei isolation and single-nucleus RNA-seq experiments. Nuclei isolation and single-nucleus RNA-sequencing exper-iments were carried out as described in Rebboah et al., 2025. Briefly, flash frozen tissues from male and female B6J and F1 mice were processed in groups of eight replicates (four male and four female) for each tissue. Tissues were mechanically dis-sociated, followed by filtering, resuspension, and DAPI staining for nuclei counting. Nuclei fixation was performed using Parse Biosciences’ Nuclei Fixation Kit v2 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 4 million nuclei were fixed for each sample, except for smaller tissues including female gonads and adrenal glands in which 1 million nuclei were fixed instead. Nuclei were stored at -80°C following final counting. Single-nucleus RNA-sequencing libraries were generated using eight Parse Biosciences’ Evercode WT Mega Kits (v2). Unlike the plate layout used in Rebboah et al., 2025, each of the eight barcoding plates were prepared and loaded with 64 replicates for a single tissue for a total of 512 samples. The first 64 wells of the plate were loaded with individual replicates, with the remaining 32 wells containing multiplexed pairs of the same 64 samples. Libraries were built per the manufacturer’s protocol and as described in detail in Rebboah et al., 2025, producing 15 subpools of 67,000 nominal nuclei per plate for all tissues with the exception of heart. Subpools were sequenced together with a single run of the Illumina NovaSeq X Plus, with an average depth of 25 billion reads per tissue (25,000 reads per nuclei). We recovered fewer than expected heart nuclei. Heart subpools were instead sequenced with an Illumina Nextseq 2000 to a depth of 1.8 billion reads. 

Data preprocessing. Single-genome reference mapping data were retrieved from the IGVF portal. snRNA-seq data were processed via the IGVF single-cell uniform mapping pipeline, utilizing the GRCm39 reference genome (IGVFFI9282QLXO) and GENCODE M36 annotations (IGVFFI4777RDZK). FASTQ files were mapped using the kallisto bustools suite 52–54 .

Single genome mapping QC and cell type annotation. Post-mapping processing and QC was performed as previously described in Rebboah et al., 2025. Briefly, CellBender 27 was used to remove ambient RNA and background noise. Scrublet was run on uncorrected counts to identify and exclude potential doublets 55 . Genetic demultiplexing on multiplexed wells was performed by Klue 56 . Tissue-level single-nuclei datasets were generated and subjected to quality control. Nuclei were included if they met the following criteria: > 500 and < 150 ,000 UMIs, > 250 expressed genes ( ≥ 1 UMI), < 1% mitochondrial gene expression, and < 0.25 doublet scores. Downstream analysis was performed using Scanpy (v1.11.4) 57 . CellBender-corrected counts were normalized and filtered for highly variable genes prior to dimensionality reduction and Leiden clustering. Following clustering, nuclei were annotated according to expression of a curated marker gene atlas, utilizing Cell Ontology (CL) IDs for defined cell types 58 . We annotated 92 cell types and states across the eight major tissue groups included in this dataset. 

Allele specific mapping. To quantify allele-specific expression, we utilized a mouse strain-specific Variant Call For-mat (VCF) file ( https://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/mousegenomes/REL-2112-v8-SNPs_Indels/ mgp_REL2021_snps.vcf.gz )28 containing variant data for the seven non-B6J founder strains. Using g2gtools ( https: //github.com/churchill-lab/g2gtools ), these variants were incorporated into the GRCm39 genome to generate a unique, strain-specific reference genome (FASTA) and annotation (GTF) file for each of the seven strains. To enable allele-specific quantification with kallisto, we then generated concatenated references by merging the standard GRCm39 files with each of the seven strain-specific reference pairs. FASTQ files representing 252 subpools from both founder and F1 mice were acquired from the IGVF portal. To eliminate mapping biases, both homozygous parental strains and heterozygous F1 genotypes were processed identically. Reads from each subpool were aligned independently to all seven concatenated allele-specific reference genomes to generate allele-specific count mappings using kallisto bustools. During downstream analysis of the founder strains, only reads mapping to the expected reference allele were retained for analysis.       

> Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv |13
> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Allele specific mapping QC. Following alignment, the resulting .h5ad files from each subpool were processed using Cell-Bender to computationally remove ambient RNA. To assign metadata to these allele-specific mappings, nuclei strain identities (for multiplexed wells) and cell type annotations were lifted over directly from the single-genome mapping results detailed previously. Strict quality control was maintained by retaining only those nuclei that had successfully passed QC filters in the single-genome analysis. Because all downstream quantitative analyses were designed for pseudobulk profiles, specific UMI count thresholds were not enforced on the allele-specific mappings at the single-nucleus level. The datasets were then filtered by their respective strains and tissues to generate final tissue-level AnnData objects. For the founder datasets, this included retaining exclusively the allele-specific mappings for B6J and the corresponding non-B6J reference strain. For the F1 datasets, data was strictly filtered to contain only mappings for B6J and the relevant F1 strain. Finally, the allele-specific count results within these filtered AnnData objects were pseudobulked using decoupler 59 to generate robust, cell type-level pseudobulk profiles for downstream analysis. 

Assignment of regulatory variation. To quantify the relative contributions of cis- and trans-acting genetic variation to gene expression divergence, we employed the XgeneR framework 30 . This approach utilizes a GLM applied to allele-specific expres-sion (ASE) in F1 hybrids and parental expression estimates. We ran XgeneR independently for each cell type within each of the seven F1 crosses in our dataset. To ensure robust statistical power, we restricted analyses to genes with ≥ 5 counts per million in a cell type using single-genome mapping, and with a mean of ≥ 10 allele-specific counts across both parental and hybrid expression profiles. Genes located on the X and Y chromosomes were excluded due to monoallelic expression. Significant regulatory attributions to parental expression differences (cis-, trans-, cis×trans-, and cis+trans-acting) were identified using an adjusted p-value threshold < 0.01 . Genes above the p-value threshold were assigned as conserved. Additionally, XgeneR calculates both parental and hybrid log 2 fold-change, and quantifies the proportion cis to determine fractional contribution of cis-acting genetic effects on total expression divergence. 

Promoter SNP density analysis. CAST/EiJ variants were intersected with promoter-like signatures (PLS) from the EN-CODE mm39 cCRE catalogue (v4) 60 using PyRanges 61 to compute a per-PLS SNP density (SNPs per bp). Each gene’s transcription start site was mapped to its nearest PLS, and the corresponding SNP density was assigned to the gene. Per-gene cis-regulatory assignments across 126 cell type-tissue combinations were aggregated to compute a fraction-cis score (propor-tion of combinations in which the gene was classified as cis-regulated in CASTJ F1 crosses). Genes observed in fewer than 33 cell type-tissue combinations (median) were excluded. Promoter SNP density was then compared against fraction-cis across genes. 

Regulatory classification and loss-of-function viability. Knockout viability data were obtained from the In-ternational Mouse Phenotyping Consortium (IMPC) 37 : https://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/impc/ all-data-releases/latest/results/viability.csv.gz . For genes with multiple knockout results, the most severe viability outcome was retained (lethal > subviable > viable). Per-gene regulatory classifications were aggregated across 126 cell type-tissue combinations to compute the fraction of combinations in which each gene was assigned to each regulatory class. Genes observed in fewer than 33 cell type-tissue combinations were excluded. Differences in regulatory class fraction across viability groups were assessed using two-sided Mann-Whitney U tests comparing viable versus subviable and viable ver-sus lethal genes within each regulatory class, with p-values corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. 

Regulatory enrichment. Cis×trans-acting variation enrichment was determined by calculating the expected number of inter-actions under independence (expected = (number of genes with a cis-acting effects + all genes with a trans-acting) / all genes including conserved) and comparing this with the observed number of genes identified as being influenced by cis×trans-acting variation. 

Interactive data viewer. An interactive web application was developed in Python 3.11 using Streamlit for visualization and exploratory analysis of cis-acting and trans-acting regulatory results and allele-specific gene expression. Gene expression data were processed using AnnData with normalization to counts per million. Interactive plots were generated with Plotly; static figures with Matplotlib. The application was containerized using Docker.       

> 14 |bioR χiv Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation
> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Tables 

• Table S1. Sample collection metadata. 

• Table S2. IGVF file accessions. 

Supplementary Figures 

• Figure S1. Experimental design. 

• Figure S2. Body and tissue weight of the eight parental mouse strains and seven F1 hybrids. 

• Figure S3. Regulatory assignment sharing between bulk tissue and cell types. 

• Figure S4. Regulatory composition in all cell-types in B6J-CASTJ trios. 

• Figure S5. Relationship between number of nuclei in a cell type and proportion of genes identified as conserved in B6J-CASTJ trios. 

• Figure S6. Enrichment of regulatory assignment sharing between pairs of cell types in B6J-CASTJ trios. 

• Figure S7. Tissue specific regulatory sharing across parental-F1 hybrid trios. 

• Figure S8. Shift in regulatory assignments associated with gene essentiality. 

• Figure S9. Relationship between cell type-specificity and regulatory assignments in cell types of the cortex and hip-pocampus in B6J-CASTJ trios.       

> Weber et al. |cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv |15
> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure S1. Experimental design. (A) Schematic representation of F1 crosses. (B) Design of sample barcoding plate for F1 samples. (C) Total number of nuclei passing quality control (QC) filters across nine tissues: Adrenal (n = 1,552,629), Cortex/Hippocampus (n = 1,321,104), Diencephalon/Pituitary (n = 1,863,454), Gastrocnemius (n = 1,608,883), Female Gonads (n = 1,087,721), Male Gonads (n = 654,238), Heart (n = 637,460), Kidney (n = 1,625,653), and Liver (n = 1,328,965). (D) Number of protein coding genes and non-protein coding genes which contain a SNP in exons or the full gene body. Horizontal lines indicate the total number of protein coding genes (blue; 21,748) and total annotated genes (red; 78,298) in GENCODE M36. 16 | bioR χiv Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S2. Body and tissue weight of the eight parental mouse strains and seven F1 hybrids. (A) Body weight, (B) Adrenal, (C) Cortex/hippocampus, (D) Dien-cephalon/pituitary gland, (E) Gastrocnemius, (F) Female gonads, (G) Male Gonads, (H) Heart, (I) Kidney, (J) Liver. Kidney, female gonad, and gastrocnemius weights for founder parental genotypes were divided by two, as left and right tissues were weighed together in the founder dataset, whereas F1 samples contained measurements from a single tissue. Pairwise differences between each genotype were assessed by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test. (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001). Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv | 17 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S3. Regulatory assignment sharing between bulk tissue and cell types. (A) Hepatocytes (left) and bulk liver (right) in CASTJ trios, (B) Hepatocytes and bulk liver in WSBJ trios, (C) Astrocytes and bulk diencephalon/pituitary in CASTJ trios, (D) Astrocytes and bulk diencephalon/pituitary in WSBJ trios, (E) Cholangiocytes and bulk liver in CASTJ trios, (F) Cholangiocytes and bulk liver in WSBJ trios, (G) Glutamatergic neurons and bulk diencephalon/pituitary in CASTJ trios, (H) Glutamatergic neurons and bulk diencephalon/pituitary in WSBJ trios. See also figure 1D-H. 18 | bioR χiv Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S4. Regulatory composition in all cell-types in B6J-CASTJ trios. Proportion bar plots depicting regulatory composition across all cell types in B6J-CASTJ trios, ordered by proportion of conserved genes. (A) The 63 cell types with the highest and (B) the 63 with the lowest proportions of non-conserved genes. Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv | 19 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S5. Relationship between number of nuclei in a cell type and proportion of genes identified as conserved in B6J-CASTJ trios. Scatterplot of proportion of genes conserved in each cell type by log10 number of nuclei in that cell type. 20 | bioR χiv Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S6. Enrichment of regulatory assignment sharing between pairs of cell types in B6J-CASTJ trios. (A-C) Heatmaps of regulatory sharing of cis-acting (A), cis ×trans-acting (B), and trans-acting regulatory effects (C), with cell types ordered by tissue. (D–F) Corresponding heatmaps with rows and columns hierarchically clustered. White cells (dropouts) indicate cell type pairs which share less than 50 non-conserved genes. Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv | 21 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S7. Tissue specific regulatory sharing across parental-F1 hybrid trios. (A) AJ, (B) NODJ, (C) 129S1J, (D) NZOJ, (E) WSBJ, (F) PWKJ, (G) CASTJ. 22 | bioR χiv Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S8. Shift in regulatory assignments associated with gene essentiality. Log2 fold change in median regulatory class proportions for subviable and lethal genes relative to viable genes across 126 cell-type–tissue combinations. Only genes observed in at least 33 combinations are included. See also Figure 3F. Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation bioR χiv | 23 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S9. Relationship between cell type-specificity and regulatory assignments in cell types of the cortex and hippocampus in B6J-CASTJ trios. (A) Plot of proportion cis and ζ values (high ζ values indicate greater cell-type specificity) for genes expressed in cell types of the cortex and hippocampus. The proportion bar plot is divided into five bins based on ζ value. (B) Regulatory composition of cell-type-specific genes ( ψblock > 0.9) compared to broadly expressed genes across four representative cell types. (C) Enrichment of regulatory assignments in cell-type-specific genes relative to broadly expressed genes. Odds ratios (OR) and significance were calculated using a two-sided Fisher’s exact test to determine if specific regulatory classes (e.g., cis-acting) are overrepresented in cell-type-specific gene sets compared to the broadly expressed background (* q < 0.05, ** q < 0.01, *** q < 0.001). 24 | bioR χiv Weber et al. | cis/trans-acting variation 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.02.716195 doi: bioRxiv preprint