Title: Contrasting patterns of seascape genetics in Acropora cf. tenuis and their symbiotic algae.

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
Contrasting patterns of seascape genetics in Acropora cf. tenuis and their symbiotic algae. 

1. Jaelyn T. Bos. ORCID 0009-0007-7877-3862. Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, USA. Email: jaelynbos@gmail.com 2. Lisa C. McManus. ORCID 0000-0002-9367-6872. University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology, Hawaiʻi Institute of Marine Biology, Kāne‘ohe, Hawaiʻi, USA. Email: mcmanusl@hawaii.edu. 3. Rachel Ravago-Gotanco. ORCID 0000-0003-3570-2005. The Marine Science Institute, University of the Philippines, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines. Email: rrgotanco@msi.upd.edu.ph. 4. Malin L. Pinsky. ORCID 0000-0002-8523-8952. Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, USA. Email: mpinsky@ucsc.edu. Funding for this study was provided by a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship (JTB), the National Science Foundation under award OCE-2443233 (LCM), and the Paul M. Angell Foundation (MLP and JTB). The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

Data availability statement 

Raw reads are downloadable from NCBI at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/PRJNA1445311 . All code, metadata, and selected intermediates are available on Github at https://github.com/pinskylab/Atenuis_Philippines. Github repository will be replaced with Zenodo link upon acceptance. Metadata is additionally published on GEOME at https://n2t.net/ark:/21547/HDm2 . 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Abstract 

Theory suggests that pairs of mutualist species will often co-disperse and share the same dispersal patterns, though the extent to which this happens remains unclear. Photosynthetic corals constitute an example of this dynamic, as they rely on algal symbionts to meet their energetic needs, yet many acquire their symbionts environmentally after their larval dispersal phase. Consequently, corals and their symbionts may exhibit similar or contrasting patterns of genetic variation across the seascape, with implications for their evolutionary and ecological processes. Here, we densely sample corals of the key reef-building taxon Acropora cf. tenuis and their algal symbionts across a reefscape in the central Philippines to examine genetic variation across space. Four distinct coral taxa show genetic evidence of long distance dispersal, including weak or absent isolation by distance signals and parent-offspring pairs at widely spaced sites. These coral taxa all host a single group of algal symbionts from the genus 

Cladocopium , which shows landscape genetic structure independent from its coral hosts. In fact, 

Cladocopium genetics vary with both latitude and depth, potentially indicating genome-wide local adaptation at a finer spatial scale than that seen in their hosts. Genetic variation at markedly different spatial scales between host and symbiont may be beneficial for hosts if these differences enable them to acquire symbionts adapted to their settlement environments. 

1. Introduction 

The spatial scale of genetic variation differs widely between species, from globally panmictic dragonflies to tuataras that exhibit genetic structuring on the sub-kilometer scale (Moore et al., 2008; Troast et al., 2016). These contrasting patterns stem partially from differences in dispersal. Longer dispersal distances can lead to higher connectivity and more homogeneity between sites, blunting the effects of drift and inbreeding for smaller populations. Shorter dispersal may enable spatial heterogeneity and local adaptation as populations evolve to tolerate their immediate environment (Slatkin, 1987). However, patterns of genetic variation may also be driven by co-dispersal among closely associated species, such as mutualistic pairs or host-microbe holobionts. How dispersal shapes landscape genetic structure in such associations remains poorly understood (Hand et al., 2015). Some theorists have suggested that the evolution of mutualisms should rely heavily on parent to child transmission of symbiotic partners, and therefore codispersal of the mutualist pair (Ewald, 1987). This is certainly true in some cases. A wide variety of terrestrial plants, for example, transmit their mycorrhizal partners directly from parent to offspring (Johnston-Monje et al., 2021; Laurent‐Webb et al., 2024). However, the real world provides contradictory examples, including the many species of corals that acquire their algal obligate symbionts environmentally, a situation that some authors have described as a “paradox” (Hartmann et al., 2017) . Environmental acquisition of mutualist symbionts occurs across taxa, and is especially common in the marine realm, including in many species of corals (Russell, 2019). Photosynthetic corals play critical roles in maintaining global biodiversity and human wellbeing, and depend on algal symbionts for their nutrition and survival (Fisher et al., 2015; Mellin et al., 2022) . While corals and symbionts form obligate mutualist associations, they can disperse separately, making them an ideal study system to understand the extent to which mutualists show similar patterns of dispersal. Most reef-building corals depend on photosynthetic algae living within their tissues to produce up to 95% of the carbohydrates they need to survive (Muscatine & Cernichiari, 1969) . These algal symbionts belong to multiple genera, and individual corals can acquire symbionts in one of two ways. “Brooding” species of corals transmit their symbionts vertically from parent to offspring, producing larger larvae that carry their own symbionts. By contrast, “broadcast” spawning corals release gametes 1

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

directly into the water column, where they form smaller larvae that acquire symbionts from the environment post-settlement (Harii et al., 2009). The second life history strategy, employed by corals of the genus Acropora , leads to the potential for corals and their algal symbionts to exhibit different patterns of genetic variation across space (Boutet & Schierwater, 2021). However, the extent to which corals and their symbionts show similar or disparate patterns of dispersal remains unclear. Fortunately, population genetic methods allow direct observation of patterns of spatial genetic variation, as well as indirect inference about dispersal through isolation by distance methods (Pinsky et al., 2017). For example, analyses of Stylophora pistillata and Pocillopora verrucosa on the Great Barrier Reef found far higher cross-reef connectivity and genetic homogeneity in the latter species, with estimated mean dispersal distances of 2100 to 5200 meters in P. verrucosa but just 23 to 102 meters in S. pistillata (Meziere et al., 2025). Algal symbionts of corals may or may not show the same level of connectivity as their hosts. Some evidence shows algal symbionts exhibiting genetic differentiation at finer spatial scales than their coral hosts (Davies et al., 2020). This could imply consistent differences in both connectivity and local adaptation between corals and their symbionts. Our limited understanding of how landscape genetic patterns differ between corals and their algal symbionts is especially critical for corals of the genus Acropora . This keystone genus of branching corals associates with a variety of algal symbiont strains acquired environmentally after their larval dispersal phase (Cumbo et al., 2013). All species of Acropora are broadcast spawners, and their asymbiotic larvae drift in the water column for days to weeks before settling (Nishikawa et al., 2003) . 

Acropora in the Indo-Pacific, including the Philippines, mostly associate with symbionts from genus 

Cladocopium , though they can also associate with symbionts of other genera (Davies et al., 2020; Matias et al., 2023; Matsuda et al., 2022; Torres et al., 2021) . Acropora are sensitive to heat waves and face a growing threat from anthropogenic climate change (Pratchett et al., 2013). In addition, some Acropora 

populations exhibit local genetic adaptation to higher temperatures at both the regional and intra-reef scales, as do their algal symbionts (Howells et al., 2012; McClanahan et al., 2020; Thomas et al., 2018) . Consequently, understanding Acropora landscape genetics matters for applied conservation questions concerning connectivity, reserve design, and adaptation to anthropogenic change (Arafeh-Dalmau et al., 2023). Here, we examine landscape genomic patterns of Acropora cf. tenuis and its algal symbionts in the central Philippines to test whether host and symbiont exhibit congruent or disparate dispersal patterns. The samples for this study are from the Philippines, which is situated within the Coral Triangle, known as the global epicenter of marine biodiversity (J. (Charlie) E. N. Veron et al., 2011) . Our spatially dense sampling took place along two different two hundred kilometer stretches of reefscape on Cebu and Leyte islands, which facilitated assessment of isolation by distance patterns. Prior study of multiple species of reef-dwelling anemonefish across this same seascape found clear isolation by distance patterns and estimated dispersal kernel spreads on the order of 10 kilometers (Catalano et al., 2021; Fitz et al., 2023; Pinsky et al., 2010) . Here, we test for similar patterns in Acropora cf. tenuis and its algal symbionts. Specifically, we examined whether (1) specific algal symbiont genotypes associated with specific A. cf. tenuis host genotypes and (2) host and symbionts showed similar or contrasting degree of genetic isolation by distance. Ultimately, we aimed to unpack the interacting relationships between genetic variation in corals, genetic variation in their algal symbionts, and physical location in space. 2

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2. Materials and methods 

2.1 Field sampling, field identification, and genomic library preparation Field sampling was conducted from January to April 2016 across 47 sites in the Visayas region of the central Philippines, including areas surrounding the Camotes Sea and Cebu Strait. Sites were distributed across Cebu Province, including Cebu Island (n = 27 sites) and the Camotes Islands (n = 5), as well as Leyte Province (n = 15). Sites were selected to be approximately 10 km apart to capture ecologically relevant dispersal distances and enable testing for isolation by distance patterns in the study region (Fig. 1). At each site, we characterized benthic cover using line point intercept transects. Three 15 m transects were deployed haphazardly parallel to shore, and the bottom type was recorded at 20 cm intervals along each transect. Following benthic surveys, we collected tissue samples from Acropora cf. tenuis colonies at each site. To locate colonies, we conducted a separate belt transect survey at each site by swimming parallel to shore within a 2 m wide belt for approximately one hour or until 20 samples were collected. During these surveys, we measured the maximum length, width, and depth of every A. cf. tenuis colony encountered and recorded the time of collection. We collected small tissue samples (approximately 2 cm × 2 cm) from 20 colonies per site, ensuring that sampled colonies were spaced at least 10 m apart to avoid resampling the same genet. A towed GPS unit was used to record the coordinates of each sampled colony. If fewer than 20 samples were obtained during the initial survey, an additional dive was conducted to complete the target sample size (depth information was not collected during these additional dives). 

Acropora cf. tenuis specimens were identified in the field based on morphological characteristics described in Veron’s “Corals of the World” (J. E. N. Veron, 2000). Key characteristics used for identification included: 1) colony growth form characterized by corymbose clumps, 2) long and tubular axial corallites, and 3) neatly arranged and slightly flaring radial corallites. Field identification focused on the combination of branching pattern, corallite structure, and overall colony architecture rather than relying on any single morphological trait. Detailed close-up photographs were taken of each collected specimen and are available at https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.sf7m0cgnr . In total, 258 samples were collected during initial surveys and 394 samples on additional dives. Tissue samples were preserved in 95% ethanol for genetic analysis. All samples were collected under Gratuitous Permit 0129-17 and transported to the United States under CITES export permit 4733. The Texas A&M Corpus Christi Genomics Core Laboratory performed all DNA extraction using silica column membrane kits, as well as double digest restriction-site associated DNA sequencing (ddRadSeq) library preparation (Peterson et al., 2012) , and sequencing. Library preparation for ddRadSeq used the enzymes SphI and EcoRI and targeted fragment sizes of 500-600 basepairs. All sample libraries were pooled and then sequenced across two Illumina HiSeq4000 2 x 150 bp lanes to mitigate the possibility of variation introduced by lane effects. 

2.2 Sequence processing, alignment, and filtering 

We did initial quality control and 3’ read trimming with FastP version 0.23.4 (Chen et al., 2018), visualized the results with MultiQC (Ewels et al., 2016) , de-duplicated and compressed the read files with the Clumpify function from BBtools version 39.06, re-ran FastP for 5’ read trimming, and re-paired unpaired reads with BBtools (Bushnell, 2014). We parallelized analysis with GNU Parallel version 20200122 (Tange, 2018). Full scripts with parameters are available on Github at 3

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

https://github.com/pinskylab/Atenuis_Philippines (to be replaced with a Zenodo DOI upon manuscript acceptance). The pre-processing scripts were developed from Bird et al. (2024). We then mapped the trimmed reads to genomes from Acropora tenuis (Shinzato et al., 2021), Cladocopium goreaui 

(Martin-Cuadrado et al., 2024) , Durusdinium trenchii (Dougan et al., 2024), and Symbiodinium kawagutii (Martin-Cuadrado et al., 2024) , all downloaded from NCBI, using BWA version 0.7.17 (Li & Durbin, 2009). The ‘Acropora tenuis ’ genome assembly available on NCBI comes from Japan and is therefore unlikely to represent true A. tenuis (Bridge et al., 2024). Given the broad taxonomic uncertainty and extensive presence of cryptic species within Acropora cf. tenuis , this genome likely represents a congener to our samples, rather than a conspecific. Across individuals, a median of 41,236.5 reads, or 74% of total reads, mapped to the Acropora tenuis genome from NCBI. A median of 14,424.5 reads, or 15% of the total, successfully mapped to the Cladocopium goreaui genome, 2771 reads (2.4% of total) mapped to the Symbiodinium kawagutii genome, and 1447 reads (1.5% of total) mapped to the 

Durusdinium trenchii genome. After sorting and indexing the resulting bamfiles with Samtools version 1.20 (Li et al., 2009) , we called SNPs using FreeBayes version 1.3.10 (Garrison & Marth, 2012), resulting in 2,491,826 

Acropora SNPs across 652 individuals and 596,153 Cladocopium SNPs across 644 individuals. Nearly all individuals showed substantial missing data, with 184 (28%) of individuals showing more than 99.9% missing data after selecting only loci with a minimum quality score of >30 and a minimum depth of >3. More than half of individuals (359, 55%) were missing more than 90% of possible SNPs. We iteratively filtered SNPs and individuals using functions from vcftools and vcflib (Danecek et al., 2011; Garrison et al., 2022), in order to preserve the maximum number of each, as described in O’Leary et al. (2018). Ultimately, we retained all SNPs present in at least 85% of individuals and all individuals with at least 50% non-missing data. After quality filtering, we were left with 2,269 SNPs and 301 individuals in the 

Acropora assemblies, and 2,059 SNPs and 310 individuals in the Cladopium assemblies. We pruned SNPs for physical linkage using Plink2 by examining SNPs across a 50 bp window size and pruning those with r 2>0.5 (Chang et al., 2015). This process left us with 1,838 SNPs in Acropora and 873 SNPs in Cladocopium .We calculated distance to shore for each sample using the global shorelines dataset from OpenStreetMap, downloaded on March 28, 2025 (OpenStreetMap contributors, 2025). 

2.3 Identification of genetic clusters within Acropora 

A. tenuis was traditionally believed to be a common coral species across shallow reefs in the western Pacific ocean and Red Sea. However, recent research has revealed it to comprise at least eleven morphologically similar but evolutionary distinct species (Bridge et al., 2024; J. E. N. Veron, 2000) . Multiple species of A. tenuis lookalikes have been identified co-occurring on the same reefs in Australia, Okinawa, and the South Pacific (Bridge et al., 2024; Matias et al., 2023; Zayasu et al., 2021) . While some of these A. cf. tenuis populations have been provisionally reassigned to new nominal species, those in Southeast Asia (including the Philippines) have so far only been defined as Acropora sp(p). The authors of a recent taxonomic revision note that this should be considered “an unresolved clade requiring further sampling and analysis” (Bridge et al., 2024). Here we refer to our samples as Acropora cf. tenuis 

to reflect both the species’ traditional classification and current taxonomic uncertainty. We determined the number of genetic clusters within the fully filtered Acropora SNP data using a Discriminant Analysis of Principal Components (DAPC) including the top 500 principal components, to capture the maximum amount of variation, as recommended by the package authors (Jombart & 4

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Collins, 2015). We determined the optimal solution by comparing Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC) for all solutions between one and sixteen clusters. We calculated principal components eigenvectors and eigenvalues using Plink2 version 2.00a5.10 in order to visualize these clusters in PCA space and quantify the percent of genetic variation accounted for by each principal component. We also examined the top three principal components for linear correlation with latitude, longitude, distance to shore, and depth. We quantified genetic distance between clusters by calculating FSTs between groups using the Hierfstat R package version 1.1.10 (Goudet, 2005). We then reshuffled all individuals between each pair of taxa and recalculated the FST 1000 times in order to simulate a null distribution of genetic distances. To assign statistical significance to the pairwise genetic distance between clusters, we compared each observed between-group FST to its simulated null distribution and calculated the percentile of the null distribution greater than the observed FST. We also evaluated ancestry for each individual sample using ADMIXTURE version 1.3.0 and all possible numbers of ancestry groups between one and sixteen using a cross validation procedure (Alexander et al., 2009) . This approach found ancestry groups that corresponded closely to the genetic groups found by the DAPC. Given these consistent differences and the substantial genetic differentiation between these groups despite their broadly overlapping ranges (see Results), we referred to these groupings as “taxa,” which we numbered arbitrarily one through four with the most individuals assigned to cluster one and the fewest assigned to cluster four. We used the DAPC to assign each Acropora 

individual to a genetic cluster, and re-filtered SNP data separately within each cluster (Section 2.2). We used slightly different iterations of SNP and individual removal, but with the same final cutoffs as described above. After pruning, we ended with 116 individuals and 2308 SNPs in Taxon 1, 69 individuals and 1689 SNPs in Taxon 2, 57 individuals and 1221 SNPs in Taxon 3, and 53 individuals with 1213 SNPs in Taxon 4. We identified potential clones using the KING coefficient calculated in Plink2 using a cutoff of 0.354 (McMaster et al., 2025) . We calculated heterozygosity and inbreeding coefficients (F IS ) for each individual sample and averaged across taxa using vcftools . 

2.4 Genetic variation with environment and geography in Acropora 

Non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis tests in R were used to test for differences in mean latitude, depth, and distance to shore between genetic clusters. We calculated isolation by distance (IBD) patterns for each genetic group individually in accordance with Sheets et al. (2018). We assessed isolation by distance in both one dimension (along the coast of Cebu) and two dimensions (all sites together). We did not analyze one dimensional patterns along the coast of Leyte because of insufficient coral samples along that coastline. We calculated pairwise linearized FST and the pairwise geographic distance between each pair of sampling sites. Only sites with at least two individuals were considered for FST calculations. For the two dimensional IBD assessment, we took the natural logarithm of these distances, following the equation for isolation by distance in two dimensions (Rousset, 1997). Mantel tests were conducted comparing the genetic and geographic distance matrices using the Vegan package version 2.6.8 (Dixon, 2003). In order to compare strength of IBD relationships between taxa, we calculated confidence intervals around regression slopes by using the standard error of the regression slope as the standard deviation for 1000 normally distributed slopes centered on the estimated regression coefficient. We then quantified the percentage of these resampled regression slopes that were greater than zero, indicating a positive relationship between geographic and genetic distance. Finally, we identified putative parent/offspring pairs from Acropora SNP data using the GetMaybeRel() function of the 5

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Sequoia package version 3.0.3 in R with no age priors, assuming all individuals as hermaphrodites (Huisman, 2017). 

2.5 Taxonomic variation within algal symbionts 

To identify the taxonomic composition of the symbionts in our samples, we compared the percent of reads mapped to genomes from three common genera of algal symbionts ( Cladocopium goreaui, Durusdinium trenchii , and Symbiodinium kawagutii ). To identify environmental correlates of symbiont composition, we used Kruskal-Wallis tests to compare the relative percentages of reads mapped from each individual to each genus to depth, distance to shore, latitude, island, and host coral genetic grouping. In nearly all individuals, by far the most reads mapped to the Cladocopium goreaui 

genome, leading us to proceed with further analysis for only these assemblies (see Supplemental Fig. 2 for percent of reads mapping to each symbiont genome). Similarly to Acropora , we used a DAPC and paired PCA to evaluate the number of genetic clusters and to visualize genetic groupings in PCA space. We found only one genetic cluster, and consequently did not subdivide our Cladocopium population for subsequent analyses. We also ran an ADMIXTURE analysis for the Cladocopium genetypes, again evaluating all possible numbers of ancestry groups between one and sixteen using cross-validation. We assigned 

Cladocopium genomes to groups based on the taxon (1- 4) of their Acropora host, calculated FSTs between those taxa, and calculated associated p-values using the same resampling procedure for simulated null distributions described in Section 2.4. After SNP filtering, more individual samples were found with >50% data present for the Cladocopium assemblies than for the Acropora assemblies, meaning that some (n=10) Cladocopium samples could not be assigned to Acropora taxa. 

2.5 Isolation by distance and genetic variation with environment in Cladocopium 

We used linear regression to compare the top three principal components of the Cladocopium 

genomes to latitude, longitude, distance to shore, and depth. We assessed isolation by distance in both one and two dimensions using a Mantel test from the Vegan package in R following the same methodology as described in Section 2.4. Confidence intervals around slopes were calculated similarly to the Acropora samples. To account for differences in sample size and geographic distribution of samples between the Acropora clusters and the full set of Cladocopium samples, we also evaluated isolation by distance patterns for Cladocopium within each genetic grouping of Acropora and reported distributions for those slopes as well. Finally, we used two partial Mantel tests to evaluate the influence of geographic distance on genetic distance between Cladocopium populations while controlling for genetic distance between Acropora populations, as well as the influence of genetic distance between Acropora 

populations on the genetic distance between Cladocopium populations while controlling for geographic distance. We did not test for kin pairs within the Cladocopium samples, as they are haploid (Santos & Coffroth 2003). All analyses using R packages were performed using R version 4.4.1 and all Python analyses were performed in Python 3.9.25. 6

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Results 3.1 Genetic groups in Acropora cf. tenuis 

Our analysis revealed four distinct genetic clusters within the Acropora cf. tenuis genetic data. The four cluster solution resulted in the lowest BIC for the DAPC, closely followed by the five cluster solution (Supplemental Table 2). These clusters appear distinct in PCA space, with more than 50% of the genetic variation loading on the first two principal components. However, some intermediate individuals may represent hybrids (Fig. 2A). Likewise, the ADMIXTURE analysis with four ancestry groups resulted in the lowest cross validation error, with the five ancestry groups in second place (Supplemental Table 2). Most individuals showed a clearly dominant ancestry group, with 99% of individuals having more than half of their ancestry coming from a single group and 90% of individuals having at least 7/8th of their ancestry from a single group (Fig. 2B). 7

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 2. Acropora cf. tenuis genetic samples belong to four distinct clusters. A. A Discriminant Analysis of Principal Components resolved four clusters, which we color and then plot on PCA axes one and two. PC1 accounted for 29% of the variation, and PC2 accounted for 21%. B. An ADMIXTURE analysis found four ancestry groups, and most individual samples had the majority of their ancestry derived from a single group. Individuals in this plot are grouped horizontally according to which ADMIXTURE group supplies the largest fraction of their ancestry. C. Sorting the ADMIXTURE plot by latitude shows intermixing of ancestry groups along a latitudinal gradient. 8

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The ancestry groups found with the ADMIXTURE analysis corresponded well but imperfectly to the genetic clusters resolved by DAPC. The vast majority (298/301, 99%) of individuals assigned to a cluster by DAPC had greater than 1/2 ancestry fraction coming from that same cluster, and 90% (271/301) had at least 7/8th of their ancestry from that cluster. Pairwise FST comparisons between these genetic clusters ranged from 0.10 to 0.16 (Table 1). For each pairwise comparison, the actual FST was higher than 100% of the simulated resamples with shuffled individuals. 

Table 1. FSTs between cryptic taxa and associated p-values. All FSTs were higher than 100% of those on a null distribution calculated by reshuffling individuals between taxa. Taxon 2 Taxon 3 Taxon 4 Taxon 1 FST=0.12 p=0.00 FST=0.11 p=0.00 FST=0.16 p=0.00 Taxon 2 FST=0.10 p=0.00 FST=0.15 p=0.00 Taxon 3 FST=0.12 p=0.00 These four genetic clusters were not separated in space. Each cluster occurred in at least 60% (26/43) of sampling sites and on both islands (Fig. 1). Taxa did appear somewhat structured by latitude (Kruskal-Wallis test, p-value=0.00026, n=301), with Taxon 2 having the highest median latitude (10.59 °N) and Taxon 3 having the lowest (10.00 °N). There was a marginally significant association between genetic grouping and average depth (Kruskal-Wallis test, p-value=0.07, n=97), with Taxon 1 having the greatest depth (13 ft) and Taxon 4 having the lowest median depth (9.5 ft). There was no association with distance to shore (Kruskal-Wallis test, p-value=0.22, n=301). 9

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 1. Map of sampling sites in the central Philippines. The red rectangle in the inset map represents that area of the primary map. Each pie chart represents a separate sampling site. Pie charts show the percentage of Acropora samples collected at each site assigned to each cryptic taxon. Some sites with only one taxon present had only one or two total samples (see Supplemental Table 1 for sample sizes). While taxa occurrence is weakly structured by latitude, all genetic groupings occurred at multiple sites on Cebu, Leyte, and the Camotes Islands. We found no association between the number of genetic reads mapped per sample and taxon (Kruskall-Wallis test p=0.22, n=301). Taxa did show significant differences in inbreeding coefficient (F) (Kruskall-Wallis test p=3.1 x 10 -6 , n=301). The median inbreeding coefficient for Taxon 4 was negative (F=-0.023) indicating observed homozygosity slightly lower than expected. Inbreeding coefficients were positive but low (F=0.018 and F=0.0011) for Taxa 1 and 2, and higher in Taxon 3 (F=0.076). See Supplemental Fig. 3 for boxplot of inbreeding coefficients. 

3.2 Isolation by distance and dispersal in Acropora cf. tenuis 

For two out of four taxa, there was on average a positive correlation between two-dimensional geographic distance between populations in log meters and genetic distance in pairwise linearized FST. 10 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

However, the correlations for Taxa 1 and 2 were negative, and all confidence intervals from resampling slopes overlapped with zero (Fig. 3). Moreover, none of the relationships between genetic distance and geographic distance were statistically significant (p<0.05) when using a Mantel test (Supplemental Tables 6 and 7). The strongest relationship, found in Taxon 4, was largely driven by three closely related individuals collected from sites at the north and south ends of Cebu, and excluding these individuals substantially reduced the percentage of positive IDB slopes in 1D for this taxon (Table 3). These individuals collectively account for the high FST values seen in some pairwise comparisons (Fig. 3G, H). Overall, a lack of strong IBD patterning suggests a high degree of genetic mixing within each cryptic 

Acropora taxon. 11 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint Pedigree analysis within the cryptic Acropora taxa found five putative parent/offspring pairs, or seven if both putatively clonal individuals at site CEB_01 were included (Supplemental Table 8). All parent/offspring pairs were genotyped at a minimum of 1000 of the same SNPs and showed a minimum log likelihood ratio of 4, indicating that the paired individuals were 10 4 times more likely to represent parent/offspring pairs than they were to represent unrelated individuals. Three of these pairs were defined as clones in the original clone scan with KING, and are marked in Fig. 4 with a letter C. Nearly all of the pairs occurred at widely spaced sites (Fig. 4). These results suggest that long (>50km) dispersal distances are possible across a single generation. 

Fig. 4. Putative parent/offspring pairs found by Sequoia exist at widely spaced sites. Dots show sites with samples included in parent/offspring pairs,and curves show connections between sites. Closely related individuals that may constitute either first degree relatives or clonal genotypes are marked with a letter C. 13 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3.3 Identification of algal symbionts. 

We identified the vast majority of algal symbionts as the genus Cladocopium across all four 

Acropora taxa and 43 sites . More than 98% (644/652) of individual samples had a higher number of reads successfully map to the C. goreaui genome than either the D. trenchii or S. kawagutii genomes. Three individuals, two of which belonged to Taxon 1 and one of which belonged to Taxon 4, had the highest number of reads map to D. trenchii. One Acropora individual, which belonged to Taxon 1, had the highest number of reads map to S. kawagutii (Supplemental Tables 3 and 4). There was no significant relationship between percent of reads mapped to a given genus of symbiont, and host Acropora taxon (n=298, all p>0.5). Likewise, there was no significant association between relative number of reads mapping to different symbiont genera and either depth (Kruskal-Wallis test, p=0.71, n= 97) or distance to shore (Kruskal-Wallis test, p=0.13, n=295). Finally, linear regression models for each symbiont genus found no association between percentage of symbiont reads mapping to that genus and sample depth (n=97, all p>0.3). Since Cladocopium was by far the dominant symbiont genus for this dataset, we proceeded analyzing only symbiont DNA mapped to the C. goreaui genome. Given the low probability of our samples belonging to C. goreaui specifically, we refer to reads mapped to the C. goreaui genome by the more general term Cladocopium .

3.4 Genetic variation within Cladocopium and its correspondence to coral host genotype 

Cladocopium did not show the same genetic groupings as their Acropora hosts. Principal components and discriminant analysis of principal components did not reveal distinct genetic clusters within the Cladocopium SNP profiles (Fig. 5A). The BIC for the DAPC was minimized by finding a single cluster, and BIC increased monotonically with the number of clusters up to at least 16 clusters (Supplemental Table 5). ADMIXTURE resolved three ancestry groups within the Cladocopium , but these ancestry groups did not obviously correspond to those found in their Acropora hosts (Fig. 5B). However, there was a noticeable structuring of ancestry with latitude (Fig. 5C). 14 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 5. Cladocopium genetic samples all belong to the same genetic cluster. A. A Discriminant Analysis of Principal Component analysis resolved only one cluster. We color Cladocopium samples by host 

Acropora cryptic taxon and then plot on PCA axes one and two. PC1 accounted for 19% of the variation, and PC2 accounted for 17%. B. An ADMIXTURE analysis found three ancestry groups, and many individuals had mixed ancestry from multiple groups. Individuals are organized by taxon of Acropora 

host, as shown by the numbered gray bars. Individuals labeled as ‘0’ belong to hosts not assigned to a taxon due to insufficient reads of Acropora DNA. C. Sorting the ADMIXTURE plot by latitude revealed differences in Cladocopium ancestry with latitude. 15 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Based on this PCA, Cladocopium populations do show evidence for genetic structuring in space across both regional and microhabitat scales. The second principal component of the Cladocopium 

genomes had a significant linear relationship to latitude (linear regression, p=0.00027, n=310). Similarly, there is a significant relationship between the first principal component of the Cladocopium genomes and host coral depth (p=0.000013, n=107). 

Cladocopium populations associated with different Acropora cryptic taxa showed weak differentiation with extremely low FSTs. However, reshuffling individuals between taxa and recalculating FSTs of the associated Cladocopium populations reveals that while weak, some of these FSTs were significantly stronger than would be expected from random association (Table 2). 

Table 2. FSTs between Cladocopium populations associated with different cryptic taxa of Acropora are extremely low, yet on average somewhat higher than would be expected by chance. The difference between those Cladocopium in Taxon 1 and those in Taxon 3 is particularly significant. Taxon 2 Taxon 3 Taxon 4 Taxon 1 FST=0.00069 p=0.236 FST=0.0047 p=0.000 FST=0.00069 p=0.291 Taxon 2 FST=0.0034 p=0.026 FST=0.0040 p=0.013 Taxon 3 FST=0.0019 p=0.176 

3.5 Isolation by distance in Cladocopium 

Cladocopium showed more consistent patterns of genetic isolation by distance than did their coral hosts. Mantel tests found significant positive associations between pairwise linearized FST and geographic distance in one dimension along the coast of Cebu (p=0.002, n=23 sites) and between pairwise linearized FST and log geographic distance in two dimensions across the entire study area (p=0.001, n=36 sites). A higher percentage of the resampled slopes (99.7%) were positive than they were for any of the Acropora taxa, and the 95% confidence interval did not overlap with zero (Fig. 6). 

Fig. 6. Mantel tests reveal consistent positive relationships between genetic distance in pairwise linearized FST and geographic distance in both (A) one and (B) two dimensions for Cladocopium .16 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

When we analyzed IBD slopes for Cladocopium within each cryptic taxon separately to control for differences in sample size and geographic distribution of samples between Cladocopium and 

Acropora taxa, a higher percentage of IBD slopes were positive for the Cladocopium samples than for the Acropora samples in four out of four taxa for the one dimensional analysis, and in two out of four taxa for the two dimensional analysis (Table 3). In the two dimensional analysis, a higher percentage of IBD slopes were positive for three out of four Cladocopium samples than for the Acropora samples after excluding one potential clone. For Taxon 3, both Cladocopium and Acropora resampled IBD slopes were positive for a large fraction of the draws, with a slightly higher percentage in Cladocopium for one dimensional analyses, and slightly higher for Acropora for two dimensional analyses (Table 3). 

Table 3. A higher proportion of resampled slopes are positive in Cladocopium than in their Acropora 

hosts when accounting for sample size and geographic distribution. Rows correspond to individual corals assigned to each cryptic taxon. The left two columns show one dimensional analysis along the coast of Cebu for Acropora genotypes and their associated Cladocopium , and the right two columns show two dimensional analysis across all sites. For the final row, the values in parentheses show the proportion of positive slopes when excluding one of a pair of putative clones that occurred at the same site. Percent of resampled slopes >0, one dimension Percent of resampled slopes >0, two dimensions 

Acropora Cladocopium Acropora Cladocopium 

Taxon 1 0.235 0.760 0.279 0.822 Taxon 2 0.264 0.481 0.226 0.870 Taxon 3 0.718 0.908 0.899 0.765 Taxon 4 0.874 (0.050) 0.954 0.902 (0.684) 0.868 Geographic distance had a stronger influence on Cladocopium genetic similarity than did host 

Acropora genotype. A partial Mantel test assessing the relationship of FSTs between Cladocopium 

populations and FSTs between Acropora populations conditioned on geographic distance was not significant (p=0.347, n=36 sites). Conversely, a partial Mantel test of between-population Cladocopium 

FSTs and geographic distance conditioned on Acropora between-population FSTs was significant (p=0.004, n=36 sites). 

Discussion 

This study used dense genetic sampling across a seascape to infer patterns of dispersal and, more broadly, spatial genetic variation in Acropora cf. tenuis corals and their algal symbionts. Unexpectedly, we found four genetically distinct but sympatrically distributed groups of Acropora within our sample. All of the taxa exhibited genetic patterns across the study area consistent with long-distance dispersal, and we found putative parent/offspring pairs at widely spaced sites. However, all genetic clusters of 

Acropora hosted primarily a single type of algal symbiont belonging to the genus Cladocopium .

Cladocopium genotypes were structured more strongly by geographic location rather than host genotype. 17 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

When comparing dispersal across hosts and symbionts, the algal symbionts showed greater genetic structure in space than did their Acropora hosts. 

Sympatric cryptic diversity within Acropora cf. tenuis 

Prior study of Acropora cf. tenuis suggests this species actually constitutes multiple morphologically similar species . In particular, the Acropora cf. tenuis group in Southeast Asia is poorly defined in terms of both genetics and morphology, and may constitute multiple lineages (Bridge et al., 2024). Our results strongly support the existence of at least four sympatric genetic groups within 

Acropora cf. tenuis in the Philippines, along with limited hybridization between those groups. Multiple analysis methods converged on four groups in our samples and assigned individual corals to groups with a high level of consistency, despite their lack of differentiation in space. Combining these lines of evidence, we consider these groups to be cryptic taxa, possibly constituting distinct members of a species complex. In particular, our ADMIXTURE results suggest limited interbreeding between the four ancestry groups, though the existence of mixed ancestry in some individuals implies that intermittent hybridization between these genetic clusters can occur. Species definitions in Acropora are frequently ambiguous, with extensive hybridization between species (Ladner & Palumbi, 2012; Wu et al., 2024) . Closely related Acropora species may be best defined as “syngameons,” or groups of two or more related species that are genetically distinct, yet regularly interbreed (Ladner & Palumbi, 2012) . Given the apparently incomplete genetic separation of genetic groups within A. cf. tenuis individuals in our dataset, these populations may fit that definition. While prior studies of Acropora species complexes have found microhabitat differences associated with different cryptic taxa (Ladner & Palumbi, 2012; Matias et al., 2023) , we found only weak evidence of microhabitat differentiation between the cryptic taxa found here, defined in terms of depth and distance to shore. However, we had incomplete data on individual coral depths, which may have hindered our ability to observe such differentiation. Our results underscore the need for further study of Acropora 

taxonomy in the Philippines, which would allow us to uncover potentially differing distributions, ecological roles, and conservation needs of these previously conflated taxa. 

Long-distance dispersal and weak spatial genetic variation in Acropora 

Broadcast spawning corals, including Acropora , often show long distance connectivity through dispersal of their pelagic larvae. For example, a study of connectivity among Acropora austera 

populations in Mozambique found genetic near-panmixia across a 384 km stretch of coastline (Duvane et al., 2025). A genetic study of A. hyacinthus and A. digitifera in the south Pacific found isolation by distance patterns in both, but only on the spatial scale of thousands of kilometers (Davies et al., 2020). Research on Pocillopora verrucosa , a coral belonging to a different genus but with a similar reproductive mode to Acropora , on the Great Barrier Reef estimated dispersal distances anywhere between 21 and 52 kilometers using isolation by distance relationships to estimate dispersal kernel spread (Meziere et al., 2025) . Patterns of spatial genetic variation in each cryptic Acropora taxon studied here are consistent with long larval dispersal distances. We found no significant isolation by distance slopes in one or two dimensions despite dense sampling across 200 km. Confidence intervals for all slopes overlapped with zero, and resampling slopes resulted in substantial percentages with non-positive slopes. For one taxon (Taxon 2), the best-fit slope was less than zero. Taxon 4 also showed an average negative isolation by distance slope in the one dimensional analysis after excluding clones. All of this suggests minimal or no 18 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

isolation by distance within the Acropora samples at 200 km scales. While still not significant, Taxon 3 had marginally stronger isolation by distance patterns than the other taxa, which may indicate shorter average dispersal in that taxon. However, this could also be due to lower effective population size, which would be consistent with the higher inbreeding coefficient in this taxon. Unlike the results presented here, multiple studies of reef fishes in this same area of the Philippines have found clear isolation by distance patterns, which were then used to estimate dispersal kernel spreads. A 2010 study of anemonefish Amphiprion clarkii across Cebu and Leyte found a dispersal kernel spread of 11 km, with a confidence interval of 4 - 27 km (Pinsky et al., 2010), with additional research showing that dispersal varied both seasonally and interannually (Catalano et al., 2024). A study in the sister taxon Amphiprion biaculeatus found a similar dispersal kernel spread of 8.9 km, with a confidence interval of 2.3 - 18.4 km (Fitz et al., 2023). The lack of any consistent isolation by distance pattern in Acropora across exactly the same geography as that used in the Amphiprion studies suggests longer, and perhaps much longer, dispersal distances for Acropora corals than their co-occurring reef fishes. Rousset (1999) recommends a square sampling area for isolation by distance patterns of at least 10 times the dispersal distance of the study organism. In the case of this approximately 200 km by 100 km area, this guideline would suggest that clear isolation by distance patterns would have been apparent for dispersal distances of less than ten to twenty kilometers. The lack of such patterns suggests that Acropora dispersal may regularly exceed this threshold. Kinship analysis added further evidence to this hypothesis, finding closely related individuals of 

Acropora separated by as much as 181 km. While these distances are mostly long, they are not implausible given the oceanography of the area and the life history of broadcast spawning corals. Some of the distances between close kin pairs found here fall within the calculated range of dispersal kernel spread for Acropora taxa on the Great Barrier Reefs calculated by Meziere et al. (2025). Larvae of many 

Acropora species experience precompetency periods of three to seven days before they are able to settle (Randall et al., 2024), and they may survive for 50 or even 100 days in the lab (Connolly & Baird, 2010; Miller et al., 2020; Nishikawa & Sakai, 2005) . Dispersal models fit to genetic data suggest that dispersal times of more than 60 days are common in some Acropora species (Davies et al., 2015). Given that our study site exhibits mostly open coastlines, with surface current speeds that may exceed 0.5 meters per second during the seasonal monsoons, we can expect these competency times to result in long-distance larval transport (Catalano et al., 2024) . While three of these pairs were identified as possible clones by KING, this seems less plausible than close kin given known Acropora life history. Acropora do not produce asexual larvae and self-fertilize only rarely (Boutet & Schierwater, 2021; Willis et al., 1997) . Clonal genotypes in other 

Acropora are most often found within a few meters of each other, as they are derived from physically fragmented adult corals (Howlett et al., 2024) . However, some species of Acropora may be more prone to reproduction by fragmentation than others, and coral fragments have occasionally been documented to settle and grow after transportation by strong typhoons, such as those common in the Philippines (Anticamara & Tan, 2018; Pipithkul et al., 2021) . It is possible though unlikely that these putative clone pairs result from fragmentation during strong storms and subsequent cross-island transportation. Alternatively, coral polyps under acute stress occasionally detach themselves completely from the coral skeleton and form a “pseudo‐planula” in a process known as “polyp bailout”. These detached polyps can later settle in a new location and grow into a new colony. Polyp bailout was originally documented in the 1940s (incidentally, in a species of Acropora cf. tenuis ) , but remains an understudied 19 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

process in coral ecology (Schweinsberg et al., 2021) . Whether the related individuals in our dataset represent true clones or first degree relatives, our finding of closely related individuals at widely spaced sites provides strong evidence of long-distance gene flow across a single generation. 

Algal symbionts structured more strongly by geography than host 

Cladocopium taxonomy remains poorly resolved, with only a handful of formally recognized species out of potentially hundreds in nature (Butler et al., 2023; Davies et al., 2023) . Some species of 

Cladocopium associate with specific coral hosts, especially but not exclusively hosts that transmit their symbionts vertically (Thornhill et al., 2014; Turnham et al., 2021). However, other named species of 

Cladocopium are generalists, found across thousands of kilometers and multiple hosts, including multiple species of Acropora (Butler et al., 2023). Extremely low FSTs between Cladocopium 

populations found in different coral taxa further imply that the taxonomic variation in our Acropora 

samples is not reflected in their algal symbionts. A study of co-occurring Acropora cf. tenuis cryptic taxa on the Great Barrier Reef also found a common pool of Cladocopium symbionts between cryptic taxa (Matias et al., 2023). Similarly in our study, we find a single genetic grouping of Cladocopium shared between all Acropora taxa. While ADMIXTURE resolved three ancestry groups, all groups were present in all Acropora taxa, showing structure with geography (latitude) rather than host. Our finding of weakly significant genetic differentiation between Cladocopium in different Acropora taxa could imply some symbiont selectivity by coral hosts, or it could result from common environmental factors structuring both host taxon occurrence and Cladocopium genotype. For example, we found that the Acropora taxa exhibited slight latitudinal differences in their distributions, and we found that latitude structured genetic variation in Cladocopium as well. This finding could result from neutral variation across the seascape, or it could represent adaptive genetic differences relating to differences in temperature along the latitudinal gradient. Studies of Acropora taxa on other reefs have also found genetic variation in symbionts that is structured by environmental factors separately from coral host genomes. Genetic variation of 

Cladocopium found in Acropora cf. humilis in the Coral Sea depends largely on environmental variables such as thermal stress, light attenuation, and latitude, and only very slightly on host genotype (Marzonie et al., 2024). Acropora hyacinthus in Palau host mostly Cladocopium , and the genomes of those 

Cladocopium vary both between reefs and with depth (Armstrong et al., 2024) . However, studies in other 

Acropora taxa, including A. hyacinthus and A. digitifera in Micronesia, have found host specialization between different Cladocopium lineages (Davies et al., 2020). It is worth noting that all of the Acropora 

taxa in our study are likely closely related, as evidenced by the relatively low FSTs between the groups. Other co-occurring Acropora species in the central Philippines may selectively host different lineages of 

Cladocopium , or even other symbiont genera. However, within this A. cf. tenuis species complex, genetic variation in algal symbionts appears to be more driven by geography and environment than host genetic variation. This result is consistent with study of Acropora cryptic taxa on the Great Barrier Reefs, where a common pool of Cladocopium found across hosts nonetheless exhibited significant genetic variation with distance to shore (Matias et al., 2023). In our study, Cladocopium exhibited significant isolation by distance patterning in both one and two dimensions. Resampled IBD slopes were more consistently positive than those found in Acropora ,even when controlling for sample size, for all of the taxa in one dimension and for three of four taxa in two dimensions. Our Cladocopium samples also exhibited spatial genetic variation at fine scales, as evidenced by the strong correlation between the second principle component of the algal genomes and 20 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

depth. Partial Mantel tests also revealed that genetic distance between Cladocopium populations depended on geographic distance, when controlling for genetic distance between Acropora populations more strongly than the inverse. All of these lines of evidence indicate that within these Acropora 

populations, geography and environment structure symbiont genetic variation more strongly than does the genome of the host. Despite these differences in genetic structure, the relative dispersal distances in the two taxa are difficult to measure directly. The slope of the relationship between geographic and genetic distance is inversely related to dispersal kernel spread, with steeper slopes implying shorter dispersal distances (Rousset, 1997). However, the slope is also inversely related to effective population size, with larger effective population sizes resulting in shallower slopes (Rousset, 1997). Without effective population size estimates for these taxa, dispersal cannot be estimated. In addition, differences in effective population size could explain some of the differences that we observed. For example, the weakly steeper slopes of some Acropora IBD relationships compared to the Cladocopium relationship could result from much higher effective population sizes in the latter. Microscopic Cladocopium can inhabit a variety of hosts and may also live freely in the water column or benthos (Bell & Quigley, 2025; Lim et al., 2019) . The inverse relationship, however, is highly unlikely, namely that Acropora corals have substantially higher effective population sizes than Cladocopium in our study region. Therefore, the generally stronger isolation by distance patterns in Cladocopium, along with the observed patterns of landscape genetic variation, most likely indicates that Acropora disperse much further than their algal symbionts. 

Implications for gene flow and local adaptation 

Corals are not the only marine animals that acquire photosymbionts from their settlement environment. Other examples include giant clams and jellyfish (Astorga et al., 2012; Butler et al., 2023; Fitt & Trench, 1981). In a very different marine environment, deep sea snails inhabiting hydrothermal vents also acquire their chemosynthetic bacterial partners horizontally (Breusing et al., 2022) . Similarly to our finding that Cladocopium genotypes depend on geography and depth more strongly than host taxon, genetics of snail microsymbionts depend more strongly on site-specific environmental variables than on the genetics of their hosts. Environmental acquisition of shorter-dispersing symbionts can enable a far-dispersing host to acquire symbiont strains adapted to their specific local conditions (Breusing et al., 2022). Our results suggest the possibility of similar dynamics at play in Acropora in the Philippines. We found low genetic structuring in populations of four different Acropora taxa across a two hundred kilometer span on multiple islands, suggesting limited potential for genome-wide local adaptation. Conversely, we found genetic variation in Cladocopium associated with latitude and depth, both of which determine the environmental conditions to which corals are exposed. Our results revealed differing patterns of spatial genetic variation in Cladocopium and their 

Acropora hosts, despite their close symbiotic relationship. The contrast between extensive within-species connectivity in Acropora , contrasted with the spatial geographic structuring in Cladocopium, creates evolutionary advantages for the holobiont. Long dispersal distances enable genetic connectivity between far-flung populations, but can limit local adaptation when parents and offspring settle in very different conditions (Kawecki & Ebert, 2004) . This may be a particular problem in the marine realm, where species tend to exhibit longer dispersal distances than do terrestrial taxa (Kinlan & Gaines, 2003) . Here we see Acropora cf. tenuis larvae traversing potentially hundreds of kilometers of latitudinal span, as well as tens of meters of depth gradient, and ultimately settling in markedly different environments than 21 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

their parents. Acquiring symbionts from the settlement environment may allow far-dispersing marine taxa to take advantage of locally adapted symbiont genotypes. Given these differences, simulations of gene flow and evolution in corals should consider modeling coral hosts and their algal symbionts as distinct yet interacting components within a single framework . The close ecological relationship between Acropora and their Cladocopium symbionts does not require parallel patterns of landscape genetics, as the taxa exhibit contrasting patterns of speciation, gene flow, and possibly adaptation. Continued study of close symbiont pairs, including corals, will be important for understanding how species interactions shape the co-evolution of dispersal. 

Acknowledgements 

This study was made possible by funding from a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship (JTB), the National Science Foundation under award OCE-2443233 (LCM), and the Paul M. Angell Foundation under award CON-F23-28 (MLP and JTB). The authors thank Isabel M. Silva and Peter T. Raimondi for comments on an earlier version of this project. Works Cited Alexander, D. H., Novembre, J., & Lange, K. (2009). Fast model-based estimation of ancestry in unrelated individuals. Genome Research , 19 (9), 1655–1664. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.094052.109 Anticamara, J. A., & Tan, C. A. (2018). Survival and growth of re-attached storm-generated coral fragments post super-typhoon Haiyan (aka Yolanda). Scince Diliman , 30 , 5–31. Arafeh-Dalmau, N., Munguia-Vega, A., Micheli, F., Vilalta-Navas, A., Villaseñor-Derbez, J. C., Précoma-de la Mora, M., Schoeman, D. S., Medellín-Ortíz, A., Cavanaugh, K. C., Sosa-Nishizaki, O., Burnham, T. L. U., Knight, C. J., Woodson, C. B., Abas, M., Abadía-Cardoso, A., Aburto-Oropeza, O., Esgro, M. W., Espinosa-Andrade, N., Beas-Luna, R., … Possingham, H. P. (2023). Integrating climate adaptation and transboundary management: Guidelines for designing climate-smart marine protected areas. One Earth , 6(11), 1523–1541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2023.10.002 Armstrong, K. C., Lippert, M., Hanson, E., Nestor, V., Cornwell, B., Walker, N. S., Golbuu, Y., & Palumbi, S. R. (2024). Fine‐Scale Geographic Variation of Cladocopium in Acropora hyacinthus 

Across the Palauan Archipelago. Ecology and Evolution , 14 (12), e70650. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.70650 Astorga, D., Ruiz, J., & Prieto, L. (2012). Ecological aspects of early life stages of Cotylorhiza tuberculata (Scyphozoa: Rhizostomae) affecting its pelagic population success. In J. Purcell, H. Mianzan, & J. R. Frost (Eds.), Jellyfish Blooms IV (pp. 141–155). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-5316-7_11 Bell, S. L., & Quigley, K. M. (2025). Global Free‐Living Symbiodiniaceae Biodiversity Mirrors Local Environments. Journal of Biogeography , 52 (7), e15137. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbi.15137 Bird, C. E. (2024). Philippines PIRE FQ GZ Analysis Pipeline (Version v1.0.0) [Computer software]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.13988542 Boutet, A., & Schierwater, B. (2021). Handbook of Marine Model Organisms in Experimental Biology: Established and Emerging (1st ed.). CRC Press. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003217503 Breusing, C., Genetti, M., Russell, S. L., Corbett-Detig, R. B., & Beinart, R. A. (2022). Horizontal transmission enables flexible associations with locally adapted symbiont strains in deep-sea hydrothermal vent symbioses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119 (14), e2115608119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2115608119 22 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Bridge, T. C. L., Cowman, P. F., Quattrini, A. M., Bonito, V. E., Sinniger, F., Harii, S., Head, C. E. I., Hung, J. Y., Halafihi, T., Rongo, T., & Baird, A. H. (2024). A tenuis relationship: Traditional taxonomy obscures systematics and biogeography of the ‘ Acropora tenuis ’ (Scleractinia: Acroporidae) species complex. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society , 202 (1), zlad062. https://doi.org/10.1093/zoolinnean/zlad062 Bushnell, B. (2014). BBTools (Version 39.06) [Computer software]. https://bbmap.org Butler, C. C., Turnham, K. E., Lewis, A. M., Nitschke, M. R., Warner, M. E., Kemp, D. W., Hoegh‐Guldberg, O., Fitt, W. K., Van Oppen, M. J. H., & LaJeunesse, T. C. (2023). Formal recognition of host‐generalist species of dinoflagellate ( Cladocopium , Symbiodiniaceae) mutualistic with I NDO ‐P ACIFIC reef corals. Journal of Phycology , 59 (4), 698–711. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpy.13340 Catalano, K. A., Dedrick, A. G., Stuart, M. R., Puritz, J. B., Montes, H. R., & Pinsky, M. L. (2021). Quantifying dispersal variability among nearshore marine populations. Molecular Ecology ,

30 (10), 2366–2377. https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.15732 Catalano, K. A., Drenkard, E. J., Curchitser, E. N., Dedrick, A. G., Stuart, M. R., Montes, H. R., & Pinsky, M. L. (2024). The contribution of nearshore oceanography to temporal variation in larval dispersal. Ecology , 105 (10), e4412. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecy.4412 Chang, C. C., Chow, C. C., Tellier, L. C., Vattikuti, S., Purcell, S. M., & Lee, J. J. (2015). Second-generation PLINK: Rising to the challenge of larger and richer datasets. Gigascience ,

4(1), s13742-015-0047–0048. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13742-015-0047-8 Chen, S., Zhou, Y., Chen, Y., & Gu, J. (2018). fastp: An ultra-fast all-in-one FASTQ preprocessor. 

Bioinformatics , 34 (17), i884–i890. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560 Connolly, S. R., & Baird, A. H. (2010). Estimating dispersal potential for marine larvae: Dynamic models applied to scleractinian corals. Ecology , 91 (12), 3572–3583. https://doi.org/10.1890/10-0143.1 Cumbo, V. R., Baird, A. H., & Van Oppen, M. J. H. (2013). The promiscuous larvae: Flexibility in the establishment of symbiosis in corals. Coral Reefs , 32 (1), 111–120. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00338-012-0951-7 Danecek, P., Auton, A., Abecasis, G., Albers, C. A., Banks, E., DePristo, M. A., Handsaker, R. E., Lunter, G., Marth, G. T., Sherry, S. T., McVean, G., Durbin, R., & 1000 Genomes Project Analysis Group. (2011). The variant call format and VCFtools. Bioinformatics , 27 (15), 2156–2158. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr330 Davies, S. W., Gamache, M. H., Howe-Kerr, L. I., Kriefall, N. G., Baker, A. C., Banaszak, A. T., Bay, L. K., Bellantuono, A. J., Bhattacharya, D., Chan, C. X., Claar, D. C., Coffroth, M. A., Cunning, R., Davy, S. K., Del Campo, J., Díaz-Almeyda, E. M., Frommlet, J. C., Fuess, L. E., González-Pech, R. A., … Parkinson, J. E. (2023). Building consensus around the assessment and interpretation of Symbiodiniaceae diversity. PeerJ , 11 , e15023. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.15023 Davies, S. W., Moreland, K. N., Wham, D. C., Kanke, M. R., & Matz, M. V. (2020). Cladocopium 

community divergence in two Acropora coral hosts across multiple spatial scales. Molecular Ecology , 29 (23), 4559–4572. https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.15668 Davies, S. W., Treml, E. A., Kenkel, C. D., & Matz, M. V. (2015). Exploring the role of Micronesian islands in the maintenance of coral genetic diversity in the Pacific Ocean. Molecular Ecology ,

24 (1), 70–82. https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.13005 Dixon, P. (2003). VEGAN, a package of R functions for community ecology. Journal of Vegetation Science , 14 (6), 927–930. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1654-1103.2003.tb02228.x Dougan, K. E., Bellantuono, A. J., Kahlke, T., Abbriano, R. M., Chen, Y., Shah, S., Granados-Cifuentes, C., Van Oppen, M. J. H., Bhattacharya, D., Suggett, D. J., Rodriguez-Lanetty, M., & Chan, C. X. (2024). Whole-genome duplication in an algal symbiont bolsters coral heat tolerance. Science Advances , 10 (29), eadn2218. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adn2218 Duvane, J. A., Dupont, S., Sola, E., Ortega-Martinez, O., & Pereyra, R. T. (2025). Genetic diversity and structure among Acropora austera populations in Mozambique suggest low resilience potential 23 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

of one of the world’s most charismatic coral reefs. Coral Reefs , 44 (4), 1185–1195. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00338-025-02679-w Ewald, P. W. (1987). Transmission Modes and Evolution of the Parasitism‐Mutualism Continuuma. 

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 503 (1), 295–306. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb40616.x Ewels, P., Magnusson, M., Lundin, S., & Käller, M. (2016). MultiQC: Summarize analysis results for multiple tools and samples in a single report. Bioinformatics , 32 (19), 3047–3048. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw354 Fisher, R., O’Leary, R. A., Low-Choy, S., Mengersen, K., Knowlton, N., Brainard, R. E., & Caley, M. J. (2015). Species Richness on Coral Reefs and the Pursuit of Convergent Global Estimates. 

Current Biology , 25 (4), 500–505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.12.022 Fitt, W. K., & Trench, R. K. (1981). SPAWNING, DEVELOPMENT, AND ACQUISITION OF ZOOXANTHELLAE BY TRIDACNA SQUAMOSA (MOLLUSCA, BIVALVIA). The Biological Bulletin , 161 (2), 213–235. https://doi.org/10.2307/1540800 Fitz, K. S., Montes, H. R., Thompson, D. M., & Pinsky, M. L. (2023). Isolation‐by‐distance and isolation‐by‐oceanography in Maroon Anemonefish ( Amphiprion biaculeatus ). Evolutionary Applications , 16 (2), 379–392. https://doi.org/10.1111/eva.13448 Garrison, E., Kronenberg, Z. N., Dawson, E. T., Pedersen, B. S., & Prins, P. (2022). A spectrum of free software tools for processing the VCF variant call format: Vcflib, bio-vcf, cyvcf2, hts-nim and slivar. PLOS Computational Biology , 18 (5), e1009123. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009123 Garrison, E., & Marth, G. (2012). Haplotype-based variant detection from short-read sequencing 

(Version 2). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1207.3907 Goudet, J. (2005). HIERFSTAT , a package for R to compute and test hierarchical F ‐statistics. Molecular Ecology Notes , 5(1), 184–186. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-8286.2004.00828.x Hand, B. K., Lowe, W. H., Kovach, R. P., Muhlfeld, C. C., & Luikart, G. (2015). Landscape community genomics: Understanding eco-evolutionary processes in complex environments. Trends in Ecology & Evolution , 30 (3), 161–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2015.01.005 Harii, S., Yasuda, N., Rodriguez-Lanetty, M., Irie, T., & Hidaka, M. (2009). Onset of symbiosis and distribution patterns of symbiotic dinoflagellates in the larvae of scleractinian corals. Marine Biology , 156 (6), 1203–1212. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00227-009-1162-9 Hartmann, A. C., Baird, A. H., Knowlton, N., & Huang, D. (2017). The Paradox of Environmental Symbiont Acquisition in Obligate Mutualisms. Current Biology , 27 (23), 3711-3716.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.10.036 Howells, E. J., Beltran, V. H., Larsen, N. W., Bay, L. K., Willis, B. L., & Van Oppen, M. J. H. (2012). Coral thermal tolerance shaped by local adaptation of photosymbionts. Nature Climate Change ,

2(2), 116–120. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1330 Howlett, L., Camp, E. F., Locatelli, N. S., Baums, I. B., Strudwick, P., Rassmussen, S., & Suggett, D. J. (2024). Population and clonal structure of Acropora cf. Hyacinthus to inform coral restoration practices on the Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs , 43 (4), 1023–1035. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00338-024-02520-w Huisman, J. (2017). Pedigree reconstruction from SNP data: Parentage assignment, sibship clustering and beyond. Molecular Ecology Resources , 17 (5), 1009–1024. https://doi.org/10.1111/1755-0998.12665 Johnston-Monje, D., Gutiérrez, J. P., & Lopez-Lavalle, L. A. B. (2021). Seed-Transmitted Bacteria and Fungi Dominate Juvenile Plant Microbiomes. Frontiers in Microbiology , 12 , 737616. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2021.737616 Jombart, T., & Collins, C. (2015, June 23). A tutorial for Discriminant Analysis of Principal Components (DAPC) using adegenet 2.0.0 . Imperial College London MRC Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling. https://adegenet.r-forge.r-project.org/files/tutorial-dapc.pdf 24 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Kawecki, T. J., & Ebert, D. (2004). Conceptual issues in local adaptation. Ecology Letters , 7(12), 1225–1241. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2004.00684.x Kinlan, B. P., & Gaines, S. D. (2003). PROPAGULE DISPERSAL IN MARINE AND TERRESTRIAL ENVIRONMENTS: A COMMUNITY PERSPECTIVE. Ecology , 84 (8), 2007–2020. https://doi.org/10.1890/01-0622 Ladner, J. T., & Palumbi, S. R. (2012). Extensive sympatry, cryptic diversity and introgression throughout the geographic distribution of two coral species complexes. Molecular Ecology ,

21 (9), 2224–2238. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2012.05528.x Laurent‐Webb, L., Maurice, K., Perez‐Lamarque, B., Bourceret, A., Ducousso, M., & Selosse, M. (2024). Seed or soil: T RACING back the plant mycobiota primary sources. Environmental Microbiology Reports , 16 (3), e13301. https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-2229.13301 Li, H., & Durbin, R. (2009). Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows–Wheeler transform. 

Bioinformatics , 25 (14), 1754–1760. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324 Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N., Marth, G., Abecasis, G., Durbin, R., & 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup. (2009). The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics , 25 (16), 2078–2079. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352 Lim, S. S. Q., Huang, D., Soong, K., & Neo, M. L. (2019). Diversity of endosymbiotic Symbiodiniaceae in giant clams at Dongsha Atoll, northern South China Sea. Symbiosis , 78 (3), 251–262. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13199-019-00615-5 Martin-Cuadrado, A.-B., Rubio-Portillo, E., Rosselló, F., & Antón, J. (2024). The coral Oculina patagonica holobiont and its response to confinement, temperature, and Vibrio infections. 

Microbiome , 12 (1), 222. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-024-01921-x Marzonie, M. R., Nitschke, M. R., Bay, L. K., Bourne, D. G., & Harrison, H. B. (2024). Symbiodiniaceae diversity varies by host and environment across thermally distinct reefs. 

Molecular Ecology , 33 (9), e17342. https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.17342 Matias, A. M. A., Popovic, I., Thia, J. A., Cooke, I. R., Torda, G., Lukoschek, V., Bay, L. K., Kim, S. W., & Riginos, C. (2023). Cryptic diversity and spatial genetic variation in the coral Acropora tenuis 

and its endosymbionts across the Great Barrier Reef. Evolutionary Applications , 16 (2), 293–310. https://doi.org/10.1111/eva.13435 Matsuda, S. B., Chakravarti, L. J., Cunning, R., Huffmyer, A. S., Nelson, C. E., Gates, R. D., & Van Oppen, M. J. H. (2022). Temperature‐mediated acquisition of rare heterologous symbionts promotes survival of coral larvae under ocean warming. Global Change Biology , 28 (6), 2006–2025. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.16057 McClanahan, T. R., Maina, J. M., Darling, E. S., Guillaume, M. M. M., Muthiga, N. A., D’agata, S., Leblond, J., Arthur, R., Jupiter, S. D., Wilson, S. K., Mangubhai, S., Ussi, A. M., Humphries, A. T., Patankar, V., Shedrawi, G., Julius, P., Ndagala, J., & Grimsditch, G. (2020). Large geographic variability in the resistance of corals to thermal stress. Global Ecology and Biogeography ,

29 (12), 2229–2247. https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.13191 McMaster, E. S., Lu‐Irving, P., Van Der Merwe, M. M., Ho, S. Y. W., & Rossetto, M. (2025). Evaluating Kinship Estimation Methods for Reduced‐Representation SNP Data in Non‐model Species. 

Molecular Ecology Resources , 25 (8), e70038. https://doi.org/10.1111/1755-0998.70038 Mellin, C., Hicks, C. C., Fordham, D. A., Golden, C. D., Kjellevold, M., MacNeil, M. A., Maire, E., Mangubhai, S., Mouillot, D., Nash, K. L., Omukoto, J. O., Robinson, J. P. W., Stuart-Smith, R. D., Zamborain-Mason, J., Edgar, G. J., & Graham, N. A. J. (2022). Safeguarding nutrients from coral reefs under climate change. Nature Ecology & Evolution , 6(12), 1808–1817. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01878-w Meziere, Z., Prata, K., Lechene, M., Ferrari, R., Popovic, I., & Riginos, C. (2025). Connectivity differs by orders of magnitude among co-distributed corals, affecting spatial scales of eco-evolutionary processes. Science Advances , 11 (27), eadt2066. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adt2066 25 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Miller, M. W., Bright, A. J., Pausch, R. E., & Williams, D. E. (2020). Larval longevity and competency patterns of Caribbean reef-building corals. PeerJ , 8, e9705. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.9705 Moore, J. A., Miller, H. C., Daugherty, C. H., & Nelson, N. J. (2008). Fine‐scale genetic structure of a long‐lived reptile reflects recent habitat modification. Molecular Ecology , 17 (21), 4630–4641. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2008.03951.x Muscatine, L., & Cernichiari, E. (1969). ASSIMILATION OF PHOTOSYNTHETIC PRODUCTS OF ZOOXANTHELLAE BY A REEF CORAL. The Biological Bulletin , 137 (3), 506–523. https://doi.org/10.2307/1540172 Nishikawa, A., Katoh, M., & Sakai, K. (2003). Larval settlement rates and gene flow of broadcast-spawning (Acropora tenuis) and planula-brooding (Stylophora pistillata) corals. 

Marine Ecology Progress Series , 256 , 87–97. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps256087 Nishikawa, A., & Sakai, K. (2005). Settlement-competency Period of Planulae and Genetic Differentiation of the Scleractinian Coral Acropora digitifera. Zoological Science , 22 (4), 391–399. https://doi.org/10.2108/zsj.22.391 O’Leary, S. J., Puritz, J. B., Willis, S. C., Hollenbeck, C. M., & Portnoy, D. S. (2018). These aren’t the loci you’e looking for: Principles of effective SNP filtering for molecular ecologists. Molecular Ecology , 27 (16), 3193–3206. https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.14792 OpenStreetMap contributors. (2025). OpenStreetMap Coastlines [Dataset]. https://www.openstreetmap.org/ Peterson, B. K., Weber, J. N., Kay, E. H., Fisher, H. S., & Hoekstra, H. E. (2012). Double Digest RADseq: An Inexpensive Method for De Novo SNP Discovery and Genotyping in Model and Non-Model Species. PLoS ONE , 7(5), e37135. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0037135 Pinsky, M. L., Montes Jr., H. R., & Palumbi, S. R. (2010). USING ISOLATION BY DISTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DENSITY TO ESTIMATE DISPERSAL SCALES IN ANEMONEFISH: ISOLATION BY DISTANCE AND MARINE DISPERSAL. Evolution , 64 (9), 2688–2700. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01003.x Pinsky, M. L., Saenz-Agudelo, P., Salles, O. C., Almany, G. R., Bode, M., Berumen, M. L., Andréfouët, S., Thorrold, S. R., Jones, G. P., & Planes, S. (2017). Marine Dispersal Scales Are Congruent over Evolutionary and Ecological Time. Current Biology , 27 (1), 149–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.10.053 Pipithkul, S., Ishizu, S., Shimura, A., Yokochi, H., Nagai, S., Fukami, H., & Yasuda, N. (2021). High Clonality and Geographically Separated Cryptic Lineages in the Threatened Temperate Coral, Acropora pruinosa. Frontiers in Marine Science , 8, 668043. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2021.668043 Pratchett, M. S., McCowan, D., Maynard, J. A., & Heron, S. F. (2013). Changes in Bleaching Susceptibility among Corals Subject to Ocean Warming and Recurrent Bleaching in Moorea, French Polynesia. PLoS ONE , 8(7), e70443. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0070443 Randall, C. J., Giuliano, C., Stephenson, B., Whitman, T. N., Page, C. A., Treml, E. A., Logan, M., & Negri, A. P. (2024). Larval precompetency and settlement behaviour in 25 Indo-Pacific coral species. Communications Biology , 7(1), 142. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-05824-3 Rousset, F. (1997). 7. Genetic Differentiation and Estimation of Gene Flow from F-Statistics Under Isolation by Distance. Genetics , 145 (4), 1219–1228. Russell, S. L. (2019). Transmission mode is associated with environment type and taxa across bacteria-eukaryote symbioses: A systematic review and meta-analysis. FEMS Microbiology Letters , 366 (3). https://doi.org/10.1093/femsle/fnz013 Schweinsberg, M., Gösser, F., & Tollrian, R. (2021). The history, biological relevance, and potential applications for polyp bailout in corals. Ecology and Evolution , 11 (13), 8424–8440. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.7740 Sheets, E. A., Warner, P. A., & Palumbi, S. R. (2018). Accurate population genetic measurements require cryptic species identification in corals. Coral Reefs , 37 (2), 549–563. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00338-018-1679-9 26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.716991 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Shinzato, C., Khalturin, K., Inoue, J., Zayasu, Y., Kanda, M., Kawamitsu, M., Yoshioka, Y., Yamashita, H., Suzuki, G., & Satoh, N. (2021). Eighteen Coral Genomes Reveal the Evolutionary Origin of 

Acropora Strategies to Accommodate Environmental Changes. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 38 (1), 16–30. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msaa216 Slatkin, M. (1987). Gene Flow and the Geographic Structure of Natural Populations. Science , 236 (4803), 787–792. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.3576198 Tange, O. (2018). Gnu Parallel 2018 . Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.1146014 Thomas, L., Rose, N. H., Bay, R. A., López, E. H., Morikawa, M. K., Ruiz-Jones, L., & Palumbi, S. R. (2018). Mechanisms of Thermal Tolerance in Reef-Building Corals across a Fine-Grained Environmental Mosaic: Lessons from Ofu, American Samoa. Frontiers in Marine Science , 4,434. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00434 Thornhill, D. J., Lewis, A. M., Wham, D. C., & LaJeunesse, T. C. (2014). HOST-SPECIALIST LINEAGES DOMINATE THE ADAPTIVE RADIATION OF REEF CORAL ENDOSYMBIONTS: ADAPTIVE RADIATION OF SYMBIOTIC DINOFLAGELLATES. 

Evolution , 68 (2), 352–367. https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.12270 Torres, A. F., Valino, D. A. M., & Ravago-Gotanco, R. (2021). Zooxanthellae Diversity and Coral-Symbiont Associations in the Philippine Archipelago: Specificity and Adaptability Across Thermal Gradients. Frontiers in Marine Science , 8, 731023. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2021.731023 Troast, D., Suhling, F., Jinguji, H., Sahlén, G., & Ware, J. (2016). A Global Population Genetic Study of Pantala flavescens. PLOS ONE , 11 (3), e0148949. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148949 Turnham, K. E., Wham, D. C., Sampayo, E., & LaJeunesse, T. C. (2021). Mutualistic microalgae co-diversify with reef corals that acquire symbionts during egg development. The ISME Journal ,

15 (11), 3271–3285. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-021-01007-8 Veron, J. (Charlie) E. N., DeVantier, L. M., Turak, E., Green, A. L., Kininmonth, S., Stafford-Smith, M., & Peterson, N. (2011). The Coral Triangle. In Z. Dubinsky & N. Stambler (Eds.), Coral Reefs: An Ecosystem in Transition (pp. 47–55). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-0114-4_5 Veron, J. E. N. (2000). Corals of the world. 3 (1. publ). Australian Institute of Marine Science. Willis, B. L., Babcock, R. C., Harrison, P. L., & Wallace, C. C. (1997). Experimental hybridization and breeding incompatibilities within the mating systems of mass spawning reef corals. Coral Reefs ,

16 (0), S53–S65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s003380050242 Wu, T., Xu, A. N., Lei, Y., & Song, H. (2024). Ancient Hybridisation Fuelled Diversification in 

Acropora Corals. Molecular Ecology , e17615. https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.17615 Zayasu, Y., Takeuchi, T., Nagata, T., Kanai, M., Fujie, M., Kawamitsu, M., Chinen, W., Shinzato, C., & Satoh, N. (2021). Genome‐wide SNP genotyping reveals hidden population structure of an acroporid species at a subtropical coral island: Implications for coral restoration. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems , 31 (9), 2429–2439. https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.3626 27