Title: General-Purpose Co-Evolutionary Construction of Parallel Algorithm Portfolios for Multi-Objective Binary Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15729v1

Published Time: Mon, 18 May 2026 01:17:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 1

# General-Purpose Co-Evolutionary Construction of Parallel Algorithm Portfolios for Multi-Objective Binary Optimization 

Zhiyuan Wang, Student Member, IEEE , Shengcai Liu, Member, IEEE , Shaofeng Zhang, Ke Tang, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —Despite recent progress in constructing generaliz-able parallel algorithm portfolios (PAPs), no general-purpose approach is yet available for multi-objective binary optimization problems (MOBOPs). To fill this gap, this paper proposes domain-agnostic co-evolution of parameterized search for multi-objective binary optimization (DACMO), which features two technical innovations. First, we propose a neural instance rep-resentation architecture that decouples domain-invariant and instance-specific features, enabling class-consistent instance gen-eration across varying dimensions without problem-specific in-stance generators. Second, we introduce LLM-based automatic search operator generation into PAP construction, extending the search space from parameter tuning of predefined templates to operator-level algorithm design. We evaluate DACMO on four representative MOBOP classes to demonstrate its effectiveness as a general-purpose PAP construction method: the multi-objective match max problem (MMMP), the multi-objective knapsack problem (MKP), the multi-objective contamination control prob-lem (MCCP), and the multi-objective complementary influence maximization problem (MCIMP). Experimental results show that DACMO can be directly applied to all four problem classes without modification, outperforms PAPs built from classic MOEA templates, and achieves performance comparable to a privi-leged state-of-the-art baseline that relies on manually designed problem-specific instance generators, while outperforming it on two of the four evaluated problem classes. 

Index Terms —Algorithm configuration, parallel algorithm portfolios, multi-objective optimization, co-evolutionary algo-rithm, binary optimization problem 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# EVOLUTIONARY algorithms (EAs) have become the mainstream approach for solving multi-objective opti-mization problems (MOPs), which pervade real-world sce-narios requiring simultaneous balancing of multiple conflict-ing objectives [1]. Multi-objective binary optimization prob-lems (MOBOPs), an important subclass of MOPs where decision variables take 0/1 values, underpin a wide range of applications including resource allocation, manufacturing scheduling, and social network analysis [2]–[5]. These broad 

Zhiyuan Wang, Shengcai Liu, and Ke Tang are with the Guangdong Provin-cial Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Tech-nology, Shenzhen 518055, China (email: wangzy2020@mail.sustech.edu.cn; liusc3@sustech.edu.cn; tangk3@sustech.edu.cn). Shaofeng Zhang is with the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China, and Zhongguancun Academy, Beijing 100094, China (email: 12445025@mail.sustech.edu.cn). Corresponding Author: Ke Tang 

applications make it practically important to develop effective methods for solving MOBOPs. For MOBOPs, the practical effectiveness of a multi-objective EA (MOEA) depends heavily on its algorithm con-figuration, including search operator design and parameter settings [6]. Finding high-performing configurations is a non-trivial task that requires simultaneous expertise in problem characteristics and algorithmic mechanisms, incurring pro-hibitive manual labor costs [6]. To alleviate this burden, automatic algorithm configuration (AAC) techniques [6]–[10] have been proposed to automate the configuration search pro-cess. These methods iteratively search and evaluate different configurations on a set of training instances and return the best-performing one as the final result. Since no single configuration consistently performs best across all instances, researchers have explored parallel al-gorithm portfolios (PAPs), which combine multiple distinct member configurations [11]–[14]. When solving an instance, all members run in parallel and return the best obtained Pareto set. By exploiting complementarity among members, PAPs can outperform individual configurations [15], [16] and naturally benefit from modern multi-core computing facili-ties [17]. Under constrained computational resources, PAPs can also serve as high-quality candidate configuration pools for automatic algorithm selection (AAS), where pool quality directly determines the upper bound of AAS performance [18]. Similar to configuring a single algorithm, manually con-structing an effective PAP is challenging because it requires identifying multiple complementary configurations. This mo-tivates automatic PAP construction methods [11]–[14], whose core objective is generalization: the constructed PAP should perform well on both training instances and unseen instances from the same problem class. When the training set adequately represents the target problem class, optimizing PAP perfor-mance on the training set can yield strong performance on unseen instances. In practice, however, training instances are often scarce or biased, giving rise to the few-shot scenario [19]. An effective way to address this issue is to augment the training set by generating additional hard instances that are difficult for the current PAP, thereby guiding subsequent PAP construction toward better generalization [20]–[24]. A repre-sentative framework is CEPS [20], which co-evolves the PAP and the training set by iteratively generating hard instances and using them to guide PAP evolution. Since different MOBOP classes (e.g., the multi-objective knapsack problem (MKP) and the multi-objective contamina- 

> arXiv:2605.15729v1 [cs.NE] 15 May 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 2

tion control problem (MCCP)) typically have distinct problem structures, the CEPS framework requires a dedicated instance generator to be customized for each MOBOP class. However, designing such generators requires a deep understanding of the target problem class and incurs substantial manual ef-fort. This highlights the need for a general-purpose method that can be applied across diverse MOBOP classes without relying on problem-specific instance generators. However, to the best of our knowledge, no general-purpose method is currently available for PAP construction for MOBOPs . Be-yond instance generation, existing PAP construction methods are also largely restricted to parameter tuning of predefined algorithm templates [20], [23]. Since different multi-objective optimization algorithms exhibit distinct performance across problem classes [25]–[27], applying these methods to different MOBOPs often requires experts to select or even design suitable algorithm templates in advance. This work proposes the first general-purpose method for automatic PAP construction on MOBOPs, called domain-

agnostic co-evolution of parameterized search for multi-objective binary optimization (DACMO). Following the co-evolutionary framework of CEPS, DACMO addresses the above limitations through two key technical innovations. First, it incorporates a general-purpose instance representation and generation approach for MOBOPs, enabling co-evolutionary training instance generation without problem-specific instance generators. Second, it introduces LLM-based automatic search operator generation into PAP construction, expanding the algorithm configuration space from parameter tuning to search operator design. DACMO is general-purpose because it can be directly applied to various MOBOP classes without problem-specific instance generators or manually crafted search algo-rithm templates. The main contributions of this work are summarized below. 1) The first general-purpose method for automatic PAP construction on MOBOPs, namely DACMO, is pro-posed. DACMO integrates general-purpose MOBOP instance representation and generation with automatic search operator design, making it an out-of-the-box method that requires no problem-specific instance gen-erator or manually crafted search algorithm template for PAP construction. 2) The effectiveness of DACMO as a general-purpose PAP construction method is validated across four representa-tive MOBOPs, including two black-box problems from real-world applications. DACMO is directly applied to all problem classes without any modifications. Although CEPS benefits from expert-crafted problem-specific in-stance generators, DACMO not only achieves compara-ble performance overall but also outperforms CEPS on two of the four evaluated problem classes. Furthermore, the PAPs generated by DACMO outperform the PAPs composed of widely used MOEAs with tuned parame-ters. 3) The proposed instance representation and generation technique is a general-purpose instance augmentation method that is not only applicable to automatic PAP construction but also extensible to other automated solver construction scenarios, i.e., learning to opti-mize (L2O) [18]. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Sec-tion II formulates the problem of PAP construction for multi-objective binary optimization, reviews existing approaches for the construction of generalizable PAPs, and analyzes their core limitations. Section III presents the overall DACMO framework. Section IV details the domain-agnostic instance representation and generation method. Section V reports the experimental results and analysis. Section VI concludes the paper and discusses future work. II. PAP C ONSTRUCTION FOR MULTI -O BJECTIVE BINARY 

OPTIMIZATION 

A. Notation and Problem Description 

Consider constructing a PAP for a MOBOP class, where s

denotes a problem instance and Ω denotes the full instance space. Each s ∈ Ω has binary decision variables and multiple conflicting optimization objectives. Given a parameterized MOEA with configuration space Θ, each θ ∈ Θ is a fully instantiated configuration. A PAP P = {θ1, θ 2, . . . , θ K } com-prises K distinct configurations, where K is the portfolio size. Let f (θ, s ) denote the performance of configuration θ on instance s, with Hypervolume (HV) used as the default metric and larger values indicating better performance. Throughout this paper, the performance of PAP P on s is defined as the best performance achieved by any member configuration: 

f (P, s ) = max  

> θ∈P

f (θ, s ). (1) An alternative definition is to merge the Pareto sets obtained by all member configurations before computing the indicator. We intentionally adopt Eq. (1) because the constructed PAPs are also used as candidate configuration pools for downstream algorithm selection, where the quality of individual member configurations is central. Our objective is to construct a PAP P from the configuration space Θ that maximizes expected generalization performance over the target problem class Ω under an unknown instance distribution p(s):

max  

> P

J(P, Ω) = 

Z

> s∈Ω

f (P, s )p(s)d s. (2) Directly optimizing Eq. (2) is infeasible in practice because Ω

is effectively infinite and p(s) is unknown. Therefore, PAP construction must rely on a limited training set T ⊂ Ω,which makes generalization in few-shot settings particularly challenging. 

B. Existing Methods for Constructing PAPs 

When the training set T contains sufficient instances effec-tively representing the problem class Ω, directly constructing PAPs based on T yields satisfactory performance [11]–[14]. However, when training instances are limited or biased (i.e., the few-shot scenario), an overtuning phenomenon analogous to overfitting in machine learning occurs: the constructed PAP may perform well on T but exhibits arbitrarily poor generalization performance on unseen instances from Ω [20]. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 3NIR ... NIR NIR </> ... </> </> </> ... </> </> NIR ... NIR NIR 

> Generate Perform-ance Report Generate Performance Report

Stop Co-Evo? 

> Generate New Algorithm with Config Space Optimize Hyperparameters

Evolution Strategy 

> Generate Hard NIRs for Current PAP
> Add new NIRs Update PAP

Initialization Co-Evolution PAP PAP Training Set Training Set No Yes Output Final PAP  

> Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed DACMO framework. After initialization, the framework alternately evolves the portfolio (PAP) and training instance set during the co-evolution phase to improve portfolio generalization performance.

To address this overtuning issue in few-shot scenarios, Tang et al. [20] proposed CEPS, a co-evolutionary framework for automatic PAP construction. CEPS improves the generaliza-tion of the constructed PAP through iterative generation of challenging problem instances that are poorly solved by the current PAP. The framework follows two alternating steps: 1) Evolution of PAP P : Find a new PAP P ′ that maximizes P 

> s∈T

f (P ′, s ).2) Evolution of training set T : Generate a set of new instances T ′ that minimizes P  

> s∈T′

f (P, s ), then update 

T ← T ∪ T ′.Tang et al. [20] applied CEPS to the traveling salesman problem (TSP) and the vehicle routing problem with simul-taneous pickup-delivery and time windows (VRPSPDTW) by designing problem-specific instance generators for these problems. Their results showed that CEPS can construct PAPs with strong generalization performance in few-shot scenarios. Despite the effectiveness of this co-evolutionary paradigm, no general-purpose co-evolutionary PAP construction method is currently available for MOBOPs. Applying CEPS to differ-ent MOBOP classes still requires problem-specific customiza-tion of instance generators, mainly because instance generation depends on problem-specific structures. Although general-purpose instance generation has been explored in single-objective optimization [23], existing methods are limited to single-objective problems and require all training instances to have the same decision-variable dimension, preventing their application to MOBOPs. In addition, existing PAP con-struction methods are largely restricted to parameter tuning of predefined algorithm templates [20], [23]. Since different optimization algorithms exhibit distinct performance across problem classes [25]–[27], applying these methods to different MOBOPs often requires experts to select or design suitable algorithms in advance. In summary, a general-purpose co-evolutionary PAP con-struction pipeline for MOBOPs remains unavailable, especially in few-shot settings with limited training instances. DACMO addresses these gaps by integrating general-purpose MOBOP instance representation and generation with LLM-based auto-matic search operator generation. 

C. LLM-Based Automatic Algorithm Generation 

Designing effective optimization algorithms for a given problem class is challenging, as it requires experts with si-multaneous expertise in problem characteristics and algorithm design. Recent advances in LLMs have demonstrated strong potential for automating this process. FunSearch first demonstrated the feasibility of LLM-based algorithm generation, iteratively generating new vari-ants from user-provided algorithm skeletons [28]. EoH [29], ReEVO [30], InstSpecHH [31], and MCTS-AHD [32] main-tain a population of heuristic algorithms, generating new variants based on existing members’ performance. LLaMEA-HPO proposes a unified framework that integrates algorithm generation and parameter configuration [33]. In a related di-rection, LLMOPT [34] uses LLMs for automated optimization problem modeling, enabling existing solvers to be applied more effectively. More recently, MEoH [35] and MPaGE [36] formulate algorithm generation itself as a multi-objective pro-cess, producing diverse heuristics that trade off objectives such as runtime efficiency and solution quality. For multi-objective optimization scenarios, existing works such as those by Liu et al. [37] and Huang et al. [38] have explored LLM-based algorithm generation for specific problem settings. However, current research on LLM-based automatic multi-objective algorithm generation primarily fo-cuses on producing single algorithms for multi-objective con-tinuous optimization problems or well-studied multi-objective combinatorial optimization problems [37], [38]. To the best of our knowledge, no existing work has investigated LLM-based automatic PAP construction for multi-objective binary optimization scenarios, which is the core focus of this work. III. D OMAIN -A GNOSTIC CO-E VOLUTION OF 

PARAMETERIZED SEARCH FOR MULTI -O BJECTIVE BINARY 

OPTIMIZATION (DACMO) This section presents the proposed domain-agnostic co-evolution of parameterized search for multi-objective binary IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 4

Algorithm 1: DACMO 

Input: Training set T ; number of member algorithms K;maximum number of configuration mining iterations 

n; maximum round number M axRound .

Output: The final configuration population P

/* --------Initialization-------- */  

> 1

M ← build an NIR for each problem instance in T ; 

> 2

P ← adopt 4 classic MOEAs (NSGA-II/III, MOEA/D, SPEA2) with default parameters, fill cyclically to size K; 

> 3

P ← Parallel SMAC3 tuning for all PAP members, optimizing for PAP performance (Eq. (1)); 

/* ----------Co-Evolution---------- */  

> 4

for r ← 1 to M axRound do 

/* ----Evolution of P ---- */  

> 5

Ptemp ← P ; 

> 6

for i ← 1 to n do  

> 7

Θ′ 

> i

← Generate new algorithm and configuration subspace with LLM;  

> 8

θi ← arg max θ′

> i∈Θ′
> i

P 

> m∈M

f (P ∪ { θ′

> i

} , m ); 

> 9

Ptemp ← Ptemp ∪ { θi}; 

> 10

end  

> 11

P ← arg max P ′⊂Ptemp ,|P ′|=K

P 

> m∈M

f (P ′, m );

/* ----Evolution of M ---- */  

> 12

if r = M axRound then break ; 

> 13

Assign the fitness of each m ∈ M as −f (P, m ); 

> 14

M ′ ← create a copy of M ; 

> 15

Mnew ← ∅ ; 

> 16

for i ← 1 to ⌊| M ′|/2⌋ do  

> 17

m′ ← Randomly select m ∈ M ′ and mutate m to generate m′ to maximize the fitness −f (P, m ′); 

> 18

m⋆ ← randomly select one from all the NIRs in M

with lower fitness than m′; 

> 19

if m⋆ not found then break ; 

> 20

M ← M \ { m⋆}; 

> 21

Mnew ← Mnew ∪ { m′}; 

> 22

end  

> 23

M ← Mnew ∪ M ′; 

> 24

end  

> 25

return P

optimization (DACMO), a general-purpose PAP construc-tion method for multi-objective binary optimization prob-lems (MOBOPs). Following the co-evolutionary framework of CEPS [20], DACMO constructs PAPs in few-shot scenarios through alternating competitive evolution of an instance pop-ulation (training set) and a configuration population (PAP). Compared with existing approaches, DACMO introduces two core innovations: (1) a domain-agnostic representation and generation method for MOBOP instances; and (2) an LLM-based automatic PAP construction mechanism. These innova-tions allow DACMO to be applied directly to any MOBOP without problem-specific customization in PAP construction and instance generation. This section presents the overall workflow of DACMO and the LLM-based PAP construction mechanism, while the details of the domain-agnostic instance representation and generation method are presented in Sec-tion IV. The pseudocode of DACMO is provided in Alg. 1, and its overall workflow is illustrated in Figure 1. In summary, the DACMO approach consists of three main phases: initial-ization, PAP evolution, and training set evolution. The PAP evolution and training set evolution phases alternate iteratively 

Algorithm 2: MOEA Framework 

Input: Problem instance s, algorithm hyperparameters. 

Output: The Pareto set found.  

> 1

Set s as the evaluate function;  

> 2

Apply the hyperparameters;  

> 3

V ← ∅ ; 

> 4

P, V P ←initialization() ; 

> 5

V ← V ∪ VP ; 

> 6

while The termination condition is not met do  

> 7

S, V S ←offspring_generation( P, V P ); 

> 8

V ← V ∪ VS ; 

> 9

P, V P ←update( P, V P , S, V S ); 

> 10

V ← V ∪ VP ; 

> 11

end  

> 12

return ParetoSet( V )

for M axRound times to improve the PAP’s generalization performance. 

A. Initialization Phase 

In the initialization phase, DACMO initializes both the training set and the PAP population separately. 

1) Training Set Initialization (line 1 in Alg. 1): Given an initial set of training instances T , we first convert all instances in T into Neural Instance Representations (NIRs). NIR is a domain-agnostic representation of optimization instances using neural networks and requires only the sampling and evaluation of a set of solutions from each instance, without domain knowledge of the problem class. The detailed NIR construction method is provided in Section IV. All instance evaluation and generation operations in DACMO are then performed on NIRs. After conversion, we obtain an NIR set 

M that serves as the training set throughout the co-evolution process, and all subsequent evolution operates on M rather than on the original T .Notably, DACMO accepts multi-objective instances as input and does not require all instances in T to have decision variables with the same dimension. This dimension-agnostic property significantly broadens the applicability of DACMO to real-world scenarios where problem instances naturally vary in dimension. 

2) PAP Initialization (lines 2–3 in Alg. 1): For PAP ini-tialization, we adopt four classic multi-objective evolution-ary algorithms as the initial configurations: NSGA-II [39], NSGA-III [40], MOEA/D [41], and SPEA2 [42], with their default recommended parameter settings. These configurations are added to the PAP cyclically until the PAP reaches its predefined capacity limit K.Subsequently, we use the SMAC3 algorithm configuration tool [9] to tune the parameters of each member configuration to maximize its contribution to the PAP performance defined in Eq. (1) with the other initialized members fixed. This tuning process is fully parallelizable. 

B. PAP Evolution Phase (lines 5–11 in Alg. 1) 

After initialization, the framework enters the co-evolution phase, where PAP evolution and training set evolution are performed alternately, starting with PAP evolution. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 5

Given the current PAP P and training set M , an algorithm mining process is repeated n times to generate new candidate configurations (lines 6–10). In the i-th mining iteration, we first generate a textual summary of the performance of each member configuration in P across all instances in M . This summary, together with the implementations and parameter values of the configurations in P , is fed to an LLM, which is prompted to generate a new multi-objective optimization algorithm and its corresponding configuration subspace Θ′

> i

.Based on the new algorithm and configuration subspace provided by the LLM, we search for an optimal new member configuration θi that maximizes the performance of the PAP when added to P :

θi = arg max 

> θ′∈Θ′
> i

X

> m∈M

f (P ∪ { θ′}, m ) . (3) To address the potential issue of invalid algorithm code generated by LLMs, we implement a two-stage validation mechanism: (1) an abstract syntax tree check to ensure syn-tactic correctness; and (2) a simulation-based execution check to verify that the algorithm can run successfully on small test instances. Any invalid code is rejected, and the LLM is prompted to regenerate the algorithm. To standardize the algorithm interface and ensure com-patibility with our evaluation pipeline, we define a uni-fied population-based optimization algorithm framework that follows the standard multi-objective evolutionary algorithm paradigm, as shown in Alg. 2: after initialization, the algorithm repeats offspring generation and population update steps itera-tively. The LLM is required to generate three core operators for each new algorithm: initialization operator, offspring genera-tion operator, and population update operator. This framework is compatible with most existing multi-objective evolutionary algorithms while providing high design flexibility for the LLM. To fully exploit the potential of the newly generated al-gorithms, we use SMAC3 to tune their parameters, since automated configuration tools are generally more efficient than LLMs at parameter tuning [33]. Unlike the (1+1) evo-lutionary algorithm paradigm adopted by LLaMEA-HPO, the population-based nature of PAP allows us to provide the LLM with richer information about the target problem class by leveraging the performance of diverse algorithms and configurations across the training set. This enables the LLM to design more targeted algorithms and configuration sub-spaces, improving the efficiency of both algorithm generation and parameter tuning. The prompt templates and algorithm framework implementation are provided in Appendix B of the supplementary material. After completing n iterations of algorithm mining, we obtain n new candidate configurations θ1, θ 2, · · · , θ n. These new configurations are combined with the existing K con-figurations in P to form a larger candidate set P ′. We then select the optimal subset of K configurations from P ′ that maximizes the overall PAP performance on M to form the new PAP P (line 11). Since all configurations have already been evaluated on all instances in M , this selection can be performed efficiently by enumerating all possible combina-tions of size K without additional computational cost. In our experimental setting with n = 20 and K = 4, this step only requires aggregating the recorded performance values for 10,626 candidate combinations, which is computationally trivial. 

C. Training Set Evolution Phase (lines 12–23 in Alg. 1) 

The core objective of training set evolution is to generate new NIRs that are challenging for the current PAP P , thereby improving the PAP’s generalization ability in subsequent evo-lution rounds. We define the fitness of an NIR m as −f (P, m ) (line 13), meaning that instances on which P performs poorly have higher fitness values. To eliminate the impact of varying objective function value ranges across different instances, we normalize the performance metric using a reference Pareto set. For each NIR m, we randomly sample 5,000 solutions and evaluate their objective values to construct a reference Pareto set, whose Hypervolume is denoted as HV ref . Let HV P be the best Hypervolume achieved by any member configuration in P on m; the normalized performance is then calculated as: 

f (P, m ) = HV P

HV ref 

. (4) This normalization makes performance values more compara-ble across instances with different characteristics and objective scales. Because HV ref is computed from a finite random reference set rather than the true Pareto front, the normalized performance in Eq. (4) can exceed 1 when P discovers solutions that dominate part of the sampled reference set. Before evolving M , a copy M ′ of the current training set is created and an empty set Mnew is initialized to store newly generated NIRs (lines 14–15). The NIR mining process is then repeated ⌊| M ′|/2⌋ times. In each iteration, an NIR 

m is randomly selected from M ′ and a new NIR m′ is generated using the instance generation method described in Section IV-C (line 17). The fitness of m′ is evaluated. If its fitness does not exceed that of any existing NIR in M ,evolution is terminated (line 19). Otherwise, m′ provides additional challenge to the current PAP; an instance m⋆ with fitness lower than m′ is randomly removed from M , and m′

is added to Mnew (lines 20–21). After completing all mining iterations, Mnew is merged with the previously created copy M ′ to form the new training set 

M (line 23), which is used for PAP evolution in the next iteration. The training set evolution phase is skipped in the final co-evolution round (line 12), as the final PAP has already been constructed and no instance generation is required. IV. D OMAIN -A GNOSTIC INSTANCE REPRESENTATION AND 

GENERATION FOR MULTI -O BJECTIVE BINARY 

OPTIMIZATION 

A core innovation of DACMO is a general-purpose MOBOP instance representation and generation method, referred to as Neural Instance Representation (NIR). Unlike existing general-purpose instance generation methods that are limited IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 6Context Vector                          

> c
> Encoder
> RNN Cell 1 Encoder RNN Cell d
> Encoder RNN Cell 2 Decoder RNN Cell 1 Decoder RNN Cell d
> Decoder RNN Cell 2 Decoder RNN Cell d+1
> x1∈ { 0,1}
> x2∈ { 0,1}
> xd∈ { 0,1}
> x1∈ { 0,1}
> xd-1∈ { 0,1}
> xd∈ { 0,1}
> SOS
> Instance Embedding e
> EOS
> ˆx1∈ { 0,1}
> ˆx2∈ { 0,1}
> ˆxd∈ { 0,1}
> Scorer Hypernework weights
> y1y2yn
> ...

... ...  

> Fig. 2. Architecture of the neural network used in NIR for a multi-objective binary optimization problem instance.

to single-objective optimization and require all training in-stances to have the same decision-variable dimension [23], NIR supports multi-objective binary instances with varying di-mensions and can generate valid NIRs at different dimensions within the same problem class. This capability significantly broadens the applicability of co-evolutionary PAP construction frameworks to real-world scenarios with naturally varying instance dimensions. 

A. Neural Instance Representation 

As a general-purpose representation for MOBOP instances, NIR can be constructed from only a small number of target class instances with no prior knowledge of the problem class. Concretely, NIR represents MOBOP instances as neural networks (NNs) that map binary decision vectors to their corresponding objective values. While conceptually similar to surrogate models used in expensive optimization [43], [44], NIR serves a fundamentally different purpose: surrogates reduce the number of expensive function evaluations, whereas NIR is built explicitly for problem instance representation and generation. The core intuition is that an optimization instance’s essential characteristic is the mapping from solu-tions to objective values. A neural network that accurately approximates this mapping is functionally equivalent to the original instance for optimization purposes. Modifying the neural network parameters thus generates new NIR instances, an approach far more general-purpose than problem-specific instance generation methods that require expert domain knowl-edge. The strong representational capacity of NNs enables NIR to represent nearly any instance. However, our goal is not to generate arbitrary instances, but to generate NIRs that pre-serve the common characteristics of instances from the target problem class. This requires separate representation of the domain-invariant features shared across training instances and the instance-specific features unique to each instance, while freezing the domain-invariant features during the generation of new NIRs. A useful design principle is to decouple these two types of features structurally and represent them with different components of NIR. Building on this decoupling principle, we propose a novel NIR architecture supporting multi-objective optimization instances of varying dimensions. As illustrated in Figure 2, our NIR follows the decou-pling design principle discussed above, consisting of three components: a Seq2Seq module for solution encoding, ahypernetwork module for generating scorer weights, and an instance embedding vector. For a given problem class, the Seq2Seq and hypernetwork modules are shared across all instances, capturing domain-invariant features common to the class. In contrast, each instance has its own embedding vector, which captures instance-specific features and conditions the hypernetwork to generate instance-specific scorer weights. The Seq2Seq module comprises an encoder FE and a decoder FD , both implemented as Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs). It maps variable-length binary solution vec-tors x to a fixed-dimensional continuous context vector c

while preserving solution structural information. Inspired by NLP techniques, special tokens including start-of-sequence (<SOS> ), end-of-sequence ( <EOS> ), and padding ( <PAD> )are used to indicate solution boundaries and align sequences of varying lengths. The hypernetwork FH , implemented as an MLP, maps the instance embedding to the weights wS of the scorer FS (implemented as an MLP). The scorer FS takes the context vector c as input and produces the corresponding multi-objective values y for the solution x.The full computational flow of NIR is formalized as follows. The encoder FE takes a binary solution x ∈ { 0, 1}|x| as input, with the final RNN hidden state serving as the context vector 

c ∈ Rdc , while decoder FD is initialized with c to reconstruct input solution ˆx:

c = FE (x, wE ) ,

ˆx = FD (c, wD ) , (5) where wE and wD are encoder/decoder weights shared across all NIRs in the same problem class. The context vector c

is then fed into the scorer FS to generate multi-objective values y for solution x. Using c rather than the raw binary solution x as input to FS offers two key advantages: it natively supports variable-length inputs, and it converts discrete values to continuous representations, resulting in smoother function mappings that are easier for neural networks to approximate. The weights wS of FS are generated by the hypernetwork 

FH , which takes the instance embedding vector e as input: 

wS = FH (e, wH ) ,

y = FS (c, wS ) , (6) where wH denotes the hypernetwork weights shared across the problem class, and e is the unique instance-specific embedding for each NIR. In summary, NIR’s trainable parameters include three shared parameter sets ( wE , wD , wH ) and instance-specific embed-ding vectors e. During training, domain-invariant features are IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 7

stored in shared parameters, while instance-specific charac-teristics are stored in e. For new instance generation, shared parameters remain fixed, and only e is modified to preserve learned domain-invariant features. Similar to prior work [23], NIR does not explicitly encode problem constraint information, as constraints are typically problem-specific and explicitly encoding them would com-promise the general-purpose nature of NIR. For constrained problems, we apply standard constraint-handling techniques to convert infeasible solutions to feasible ones before feeding them into NIR, with further details in Section V-A. 

B. Training NIRs 

Before converting instances to NIRs, we perform a one-time domain-agnostic pre-training step for the Seq2Seq module, yielding weights that serve as universal initialization for all MOBOP domains. The pre-training objective minimizes cross-entropy reconstruction error between the input binary solution 

x and the decoder output ˆx, ensuring the context vector c

preserves complete solution structural information and acceler-ates convergence during subsequent domain-specific training. As pre-training uses only random binary solutions and no problem-specific information, the resulting wE and wD are valid initial weights for any MOBOP domain. During the initialization phase of DACMO, given a training instance set T = {s1, s 2, . . . , s |T |}, we generate a corre-sponding NIR set M = {m1, m 2, . . . , m |T |} with each mi

representing si. All mi share Seq2Seq weights wE , wD and hypernetwork weights wH , with a unique instance embedding 

ei for each mi. For each si, we sample solutions and evaluate their ground-truth objective values to construct the training dataset Xi = {(xik, yik)}|X i|

> k=1

.For training, wE and wD are initialized with pre-trained weights, while wH and all ei are randomly initialized. We optimize the following loss function via gradient descent: 

min wE ,wD ,wH ,  

> e1,e2,..., e|T|
> |T|

X

> i=1

X

> (x,y)∈X i

MSE (y, y′)

− λ

|T |

P|x| 

> j=1

tj log ( pj )

|x| ,

(7) where MSE is mean squared error, y′ denotes the NIR-predicted objective values, tj is the one-hot vector of the j-th bit of x, pj is the decoder’s output probability distribution for the j-th token, and λ is a hyperparameter balancing the two loss terms. The first term is the MSE loss that ensures NIR accurately predicts solution objective values. The second term is the cross-entropy loss that preserves the Seq2Seq module’s solution reconstruction capability, with the 1  

> |T|

factor eliminating the influence of instance quantity on gradient magnitude for the shared Seq2Seq during multi-instance joint training. 

C. Instance Generation via NIR Perturbation 

As described in Section III-C, training set evolution aims to generate new NIRs that are challenging for the current PAP 

P , with challenge quantified by the normalized performance 

f (P, m ) in Eq. (4): lower values indicate poorer PAP perfor-mance. Building on the NIR parameter sharing design introduced earlier, all domain-invariant parameters remain fixed during new instance generation, so we only need to optimize the instance embedding vector e. The generation process is thus formulated as a continuous optimization problem with e as the decision variable: 

e = arg min 

> e′∈Rde

f (P, m (e′)) , (8) where de is the dimension of the instance embedding vector, and m(e′) denotes the NIR corresponding to embedding e′.As evaluating this objective requires executing the PAP on the NIR and computing the HV indicator, the function is black-box with no accessible gradients. We adopt PGPE [45], an evolution strategy particularly effective for black-box continu-ous optimization, for this task (algorithm details are provided in Appendix A of the supplementary material). Note that optimizer selection is not a core contribution of this work: any black-box continuous optimizer can be used here. This generation approach encourages the produced NIRs to preserve domain-invariant characteristics of the target problem class while providing sufficient diversity to drive PAP evolu-tion. V. C OMPUTATIONAL STUDIES 

We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate DACMO on four representative MOBOPs: the multi-objective match max problem (MMMP), the multi-objective knapsack prob-lem (MKP), the multi-objective contamination control prob-lem (MCCP), and the multi-objective complementary influence maximization problem (MCIMP). Among them, MCIMP and MCCP are derived from real-world applications rather than synthetic benchmarks. Our experiments are designed to answer four research questions ( RQs ): 

RQ1 : Does DACMO realize general-purpose PAP con-struction for MOBOPs, i.e., can the same pipeline be applied unchanged across diverse MOBOP classes? 

RQ2 : How effective is DACMO’s LLM-based automatic PAP construction mechanism? Can it achieve su-perior performance compared to directly employing classic MOEAs as fixed algorithm templates? 

RQ3 : Do generated NIRs exhibit characteristics consistent with real instances from the target problem class? 

RQ4 : When used as a candidate configuration pool for downstream automatic algorithm selection (AAS) rather than deployed directly as a parallel portfolio, how well do the PAPs constructed by DACMO perform? For each problem class, instances are generated from pub-lic benchmarks and partitioned into training and test sets. Following prior few-shot PAP construction protocols [23], we use only 5 training instances, with dimensions 32, 40, 48, 56, and 64, to simulate limited data availability. The test set contains 30 independent instances for each of four dimensions (32, 48, 64, and 100), with no overlap with the training set. All PAP construction is performed using only IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 8

the training set, and all performance results are reported on held-out test instances. The source code and benchmark instances have been anonymously released at https://github. com/AnonymousSubmitBot/DACMO. Notably, CEPS is selected as a privileged expert-informed baseline because its instance generator uses the exact mech-anism that produces the training instances, thereby enabling perfectly in-distribution training instance generation. This as-sumes that users possess sufficient domain knowledge across all four problem classes to design effective instance generators. As a domain-agnostic method, DACMO is therefore expected to perform comparably to, or slightly worse than, CEPS. Nevertheless, DACMO outperforms CEPS on MMMP and MCIMP despite this disadvantage. The remaining subsections detail the problem classes, com-parison methods, experimental protocol, and empirical results for the four research questions. 

A. Problem Instances and Constraint Handling 

Among the four evaluated MOBOPs, MKP and MCIMP involve constraints. As noted in Section IV-A, the NIR does not explicitly encode constraint information; instead, sim-ple constraint-handling techniques are applied. The details for each problem class, including its objective functions, constraint-handling techniques, and instance generation pro-cedures, are provided below. 

1) Multi-Objective Match Max Problem (MMMP): The MMMP is a generalized extension of the classic OneMin-Max problem [46]. We extend this classic benchmark to simultaneously maximize the match score between candidate solutions and multiple binary reference vectors r1, r2, · · · , rn.The original OneMinMax problem uses only two reference vectors: an all-ones vector and an all-zeros vector. For an n-objective d-dimensional MMMP instance, the objective func-tion is formally defined as: 

max 

> x∈{ 0,1}d

F (x) = [ f1 (x) , f 2 (x) , · · · , f n (x)] T ,fj (x) = d − DHamming (x, rj )

(9) MMMP is an unconstrained optimization problem. In our experiments, we set n = 3 for all MMMP instances. During instance generation, we enforce that all reference vector pairs satisfy DHamming (ri, rj ) > dn .

2) Multi-Objective Knapsack Problem (MKP): The MKP [47] is a multi-objective extension of the classic knapsack problem (KP), which maximizes selected item value subject to a maximum weight constraint wmax . In our experiments, we use the bi-objective MKP where each item has two distinct value attributes, with the goal of maximizing both total value metrics simultaneously. For a d-dimensional bi-objective MKP instance with item weights wi and value attributes vij for the j-th objective, the optimization problem is defined as: 

max 

> x∈{ 0,1}d

F (x) = [ f1 (x) , f 2 (x)] T ,f1 (x) = 

> d

X

> i=1

xivi1, f2 (x) = 

> d

X

> i=1

xivi2,s.t. 

> d

X

> i=1

xiwi ≤ wmax 

(10) MKP includes a total weight constraint. Infeasible solutions violating this constraint are repaired by iterating through item indices to identify the position where cumulative weight first exceeds wmax , then setting all subsequent xi to 0 to restore feasibility. During MKP instance generation, we sample a random real number p, with p ∈ [0 .6, 0.75] for training instances and p ∈

[0 .65 , 0.8] for test instances. For the first value attribute, half of the items have values in [0 , p ] and the other half in [p, 1] ; for the second value attribute, half have values in [0 , 1 − p] and the other half in [1 − p, 1] . We enforce the monotonic property that for any two items a and b, wa > w b implies vaj > v bj 

for all value attributes. 

3) Multi-Objective Contamination Control Prob-lem (MCCP): The MCCP is a multi-objective variant of the contamination control problem (CCP) [48]. The original CCP minimizes contamination control costs subject to a maximum allowable contamination rate constraint, while recent work often converts this to a single-objective problem by treating contamination violations as a penalty term [49]. In our experiments, we formulate MCCP as a bi-objective optimization problem that simultaneously minimizes the probability of contamination exceeding regulatory limits and the total control cost. For a d-dimensional MCCP instance, the system consists of d sequential processing stages, where stage i has a control cost ci. Setting xi = 1 indicates deploying a control mea-sure that reduces contamination at rate Γi, while xi = 0

indicates no control, allowing contamination to increase at rate αi. The contamination rate at stage i is given by zi =

αi (1 − xi) (1 − zi−1) + (1 − Γixi) zi−1.The cost ci is uniformly sampled from [0 , 1] . The initial con-tamination rate z0, control rate Γi, and contamination growth rate αi are all random variables following Beta distributions with shape parameter α = 1 . The second shape parameter β is uniformly sampled from different ranges for training and test instances: for training instances, βz0 ∈ [20 , 28] , βΓ ∈ [4 , 6] ,and βα ∈ [4 , 6] ; for test instances, βz0 ∈ [24 , 32] , βΓ ∈ [5 , 7] ,and βα ∈ [5 , 7] . The maximum allowable contamination rate u

is set to 0.1 for training instances and 0.15 for test instances. Solution evaluation requires NMC = 1000 Monte Carlo samples to account for stochasticity. To maintain consistency with our unified maximization formulation across all bench-marks, the optimization objectives are defined as: 

max 

> x∈{ 0,1}d

F (x) = [ f1 (x) , f 2 (x)] T ,f1 (x) = 

> d

X

> i=1

1

NMC 

> NMC

X

> k=1

1zki <u , f2 (x) = −

> d

X

> i=1

cixi

(11) IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 9

where zki denotes the contamination rate at stage i during the 

k-th Monte Carlo sampling iteration. 

4) Multi-Objective Complementary Influence Maximization Problem (MCIMP): The MCIMP [5] is a multi-objective variant of the complementary influence maximization prob-lem (CIMP) [50], a core optimization task in social network analysis. By introducing a cost objective, MCIMP simultane-ously maximizes the spread of opinions across the network and minimizes the total seeding cost. For a d-dimensional MCIMP instance, we are given a social network G = ( V, E, p ), a candidate seed set N ⊂ V of size 

d, an initial cooperative set SA of nodes holding opinion A,and interaction parameters between opinions A and B: q =qA|∅ , q A|B , q B|∅ , q B|A

. The cost of node i is defined as ci =

λi × ri, where ri is the degree of node i, and λi ∈ [0 .8, 1.2] 

is an independent random variable sampled per node. Setting 

xi = 1 indicates selecting the i-th node from N as a seed holding opinion B, incurring cost ci, while xi = 0 indicates the node is not selected. To maintain consistency with our unified maximization formulation across all benchmarks, the optimization problem is formally defined as: 

max 

> x∈{ 0,1}d

F (x) = [ f1 (x) , f 2 (x)] T ,f1 (x) = ActiveNum (G, N, S A, q, x) ,f2 (x) = −

> d

X

> i=1

cixi,s.t. 

> d

X

> i=1

xi ≤ k

(12) The objective f1, representing the total number of activated nodes with opinion B, is evaluated via Monte Carlo simulation of the influence propagation process detailed in [50]. MCIMP includes a maximum seed count constraint. In-feasible solutions violating this constraint are repaired by retaining only the first k selected seeds in index order to restore feasibility. For instance generation, training instances use the fixed “Wiki” dataset as the underlying social network G, while test instances sample G uniformly from the “Wiki”, “Face-book”, and “Epinions” datasets. The interaction parameters q

are uniformly sampled from two recommended configurations commonly used in the literature [50]: [0 .5, 0.75 , 0.5, 0.75] and 

[0 .5, 0.25 , 0.5, 0.25] .

B. Compared Methods 

To address RQ1 and RQ2 , we compare DACMO against several state-of-the-art and ablation baselines for automatic PAP construction: 1) CEPS (Privileged expert-informed baseline): This baseline adopts domain-specific instance generation mechanisms matching the training instance genera-tion process for each problem class, while incorporat-ing DACMO’s LLM-based automatic PAP construction mechanism to ensure fair comparison. 2) NoInsGen (Ablation baseline): This baseline removes the general-purpose instance generation component en-tirely, using only the initial training set for PAP con-                         

> TABLE I THE ARCHITECTURE AND TRAINING PARAMETERS OF THE NIR IN
> DACMO. Parameter Name Parameter Value Token Embedding Size 64 GRU Hidden Layer Widths: [128, 128] Latent Dimension dc= 256
> Instance Embedding Dimension de= 32
> Scorer MLP Layer Widths: [128, 128, n]nis #objectives Hypernetwork MLP Layer Widths: [64, 49408 + 129 ×n]Activation Function LeakyReLU in Hypernetwork. Learning Rate [0 .002 ,0.0005] , decayed using cosine annealing. Batch Size 1024 Epochs 5000

struction while retaining DACMO’s LLM-based PAP construction mechanism, to validate the effectiveness of the proposed instance generation module. 3) NoAlgDesign (Ablation baseline): This baseline uses the full training set obtained from the final co-evolution round of DACMO, but replaces the LLM-based PAP evolution module with parameter tuning of four clas-sic multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (NSGA-II, NSGA-III, MOEA/D, SPEA2) via SMAC, to validate the contribution of DACMO’s LLM-based PAP con-struction mechanism. Two manually constructed baselines are also included to demonstrate the necessity of automatic PAP construction: 1) Default: A portfolio of four classic MOEAs with their default parameter settings recommended in existing lit-erature [39]–[42]. 2) Tuning: A portfolio of four classic MOEAs tuned via SMAC on the initial training set, serving as an optimized manual configuration baseline. To address RQ3 , we qualitatively examine whether NIR pro-vides a class-consistent representation for instance generation via objective space visualization. We sample a large number of random solutions and evaluate their objective values to visualize the objective spaces of both real instances from the target problem class and generated NIRs for the same class. Similarity between generated NIRs and real instances at the problem class level is assessed by comparing the shape and distribution of their objective spaces. To address RQ4 , we evaluate the utility of DACMO-constructed PAPs as candidate pools for downstream AAS under three illustrative extreme scenarios: 1) Oracle selection: The AAS method always selects the best-performing configuration in the PAP for each test instance, providing an upper bound on achievable AAS performance. 2) Worst-case selection: The AAS method always selects the worst-performing configuration in the PAP for each test instance, providing a lower bound. 3) Random selection: The AAS method uniformly sam-ples a configuration from the PAP for each test instance, with performance measured as the average of all member configurations’ performance. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 10                                                                                                                                                                          

> TABLE II MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF NORMALIZED HV P ERFORMANCE FOR PAP S BY DIFFERENT METHODS ACROSS PROBLEM CLASSES AND
> DIMENSIONS , I NCLUDING AGGREGATED MEAN HV PER CLASS , W ITH p= 0 .05 WILCOXON SIGNED -R ANK TESTS COMPARING THE BEST PAP TO
> OTHERS . B EST PERFORMANCE PER CLASS AND DIMENSION ISBOLDED WITH GRAY BACKGROUND ; P ERFORMANCE NOT SIGNIFICANTLY
> DIFFERENT FROM THE BEST ISUNDERLINED ; H IGHER VALUES INDICATE BETTER PERFORMANCE
> Problem Dim DACMO CEPS NoInsGen NoAlgDesign Tuning Default MMMP 32 1.2885±0.047 1.2952±0.055 1.2942±0.056 1.2688±0.054 1.2252±0.050 1.1751±0.054 48 1.5726±0.109 1.5513±0.106 1.5551±0.123 1.5369±0.098 1.4805±0.104 1.3749±0.099 64 1.8270±0.102 1.7756±0.115 1.7461±0.114 1.7541±0.102 1.6614±0.106 1.4941±0.085 100 2.1721±0.178 2.0851±0.174 2.0367±0.144 2.0465±0.178 1.8962±0.151 1.6247±0.109 Total 1.715 1.677 1.658 1.652 1.566 1.417 MKP 32 0.9893±0.027 1.0177±0.052 0.9823±0.024 0.9906±0.029 0.9895±0.020 0.9815±0.018 48 1.0067±0.041 1.0220±0.049 0.9877±0.028 1.0049±0.035 0.9958±0.023 0.9876±0.027 64 1.0105±0.036 1.0104±0.028 1.0048±0.034 1.0044±0.032 0.9899±0.020 0.9952±0.026 100 1.0169±0.042 1.0216±0.027 0.9998±0.035 1.0200±0.040 0.9878±0.038 0.9929±0.032 Total 1.006 1.018 0.994 1.005 0.991 0.989 MCCP 32 1.3197±0.042 1.3202±0.041 1.3100±0.043 1.2808±0.045 1.2420±0.036 1.1601±0.038 48 1.6817±0.095 1.7186±0.088 1.5991±0.090 1.5311±0.077 1.4102±0.071 1.2720±0.062 64 2.0079±0.147 2.1222±0.165 1.8434±0.130 1.6767±0.115 1.4964±0.087 1.2605±0.085 100 2.3522±0.209 2.9089±0.298 2.1817±0.218 1.8885±0.135 1.5723±0.116 1.2744±0.084 Total 1.840 2.017 1.734 1.594 1.430 1.242 MCIMP 32 1.1638±0.126 1.1609±0.125 1.1617±0.126 1.1574±0.125 1.1069±0.113 1.0470±0.091 48 1.3514±0.209 1.3469±0.206 1.3472±0.208 1.2443±0.154 1.1912±0.131 1.0884±0.114 64 1.5501±0.303 1.5417±0.298 1.5462±0.303 1.3009±0.226 1.2613±0.184 1.1300±0.092 100 1.8309±0.483 1.8151±0.475 1.8262±0.486 1.3197±0.273 1.3360±0.297 1.1093±0.134 Total 1.474 1.466 1.470 1.256 1.224 1.094

We compare the performance of these three AAS scenarios using DACMO PAPs against single classic MOEAs. The oracle and worst-case performance are directly derived from the maximum and minimum performance values of PAP mem-bers on each instance, while random selection performance corresponds to the mean performance of all PAP members. 

C. Experimental Protocol 

Following prior experimental protocols for few-shot PAP construction [20], [23], the portfolio size K (number of member configurations per PAP) is set to 4. The maximum number of co-evolution rounds (i.e., M axRound ) is set to 4. In the PAP evolution phase, n = 20 candidate configurations are generated per round, with SMAC parameter tuning limited to 1600 trials per configuration. For the training set evolution phase, the instance mutation operator runs for a maximum of 200 iterations per generation, and the hardest instance (on which the current PAP achieves the lowest normalized perfor-mance defined in Eq. (4)) from these iterations is selected to update the instance population. The architecture and training parameters of the NIR module are listed in Table I, and these settings were selected based on empirical experience. For consistent and fair HV evaluation across all methods, we use a uniform procedure to compute a valid reference point for each test instance. First, we sample 100,000 random solutions for the instance and evaluate their objective values, using the minimum value across each objective dimension as the initial reference point. We then run all evaluated PAPs on the instance, recording all Pareto sets discovered by their member configurations. During this execution, we track all observed objective values and update the reference point to the new minimum value across each objective dimension if more extreme values are discovered. This dynamic reference-point adjustment guarantees validity for all discovered Pareto sets, as no solution will have objective values less than the final reference point. All reported HV metrics are computed using this finalized reference point. To reduce the impact of varying objective scales across different instances, we additionally construct a reference Pareto set from the sampled random solutions and report the normalized HV performance defined in Eq. (4). Because this reference set is only an empirical approximation, the reported performance may exceed 1 when an algorithm discovers solutions that dominate part of the sam-pled reference set. Additionally, since some multi-objective optimization algorithms use HV to guide population updates, the initial objective range derived from random solutions is provided as a parameter to all PAPs and is dynamically updated during optimization if broader objective ranges are encountered. All experiments are conducted on a computing infrastruc-ture running Ubuntu 22.04 with Python 3.10 as the develop-ment environment. Compute nodes utilize AMD EPYC CPUs paired with NVIDIA GPUs of both Ampere and Ada Lovelace architectures. The recommended hardware configuration for running DACMO is a system with 64 CPU cores, 128 GB of RAM, and 8 GPUs each with at least 11 GB of VRAM. For LLM-based algorithm generation, we use Kimi-K2.5 accessed via the OpenRouter API. 

D. Results for RQ1 and RQ2 

To answer RQ1 and RQ2 , Table II reports the mean and standard deviation of normalized performances for Pareto sets discovered by PAPs on instances of varying dimensions across all problem classes, along with results of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests comparing the best-performing method against all IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 11 dim 32 40 48 56 64 Training Instances       

> dim 32 48 64 100 Random Generated NIRs
> dim 32 48 64 100 Test Instances

MKP Objective Space 

(a) Training Instances          

> dim 64 32 40 48 56
> dim 32 48 64 100 Random Generated NIRs
> dim 32 48 64 100 Test Instances

MCCP Objective Space  (b) dim 32 40 48 56 64 Training Instances       

> dim 32 48 64 100 Random Generated NIRs
> dim 32 48 64 100 Test Instances

MCIMP Objective Space  (c) 

> Fig. 3. Objective space visualization for the three evaluated bi-objective optimization problem classes. Each subplot shows the objective space shapes of training instances, randomly generated NIR instances and representative test instances for the corresponding problem class. The dim-axis indicates the dimension of the instances. (a) MKP. (b) MCCP. (c) MCIMP.

other baselines. Aggregate mean performance across dimen-sions within each problem class is also reported with corre-sponding statistical validation. DACMO is first compared against the privileged expert-informed baseline CEPS. Table II shows that DACMO out-performs CEPS on MMMP and MCIMP, while performing worse than CEPS on MKP and MCCP. Further inspection reveals that DACMO only exhibits a substantial performance gap with CEPS on 100-dimensional MCCP instances, with minimal differences across all other scenarios. This result suggests that DACMO’s domain-agnostic instance-generation mechanism is highly effective for constructing PAPs. This observed performance pattern may be attributed to the differ-ing instance generation mechanisms: CEPS produces instances strictly limited to the training distribution, which may not perfectly align with the test distribution. In contrast, DACMO’s NIR-based generation does not strictly constrain instance distribution to the training set: this double-edged property may reduce test set representativeness in problem classes like MKP and MCCP, but enables broader problem space coverage and better performance on unseen instances in problem classes like MMMP and MCIMP. DACMO is next evaluated against the NoInsGen and NoAlgDesign ablation baselines, which respectively retain only DACMO’s PAP construction module and the augmented training set. DACMO achieves statistically significant and substantial performance gains over both baselines, with only a small advantage over NoAlgDesign on MKP. This limited gain is attributed to the high suitability of the four classic MOEAs (NSGA-II, NSGA-III, MOEA/D, and SPEA2) for MKP: when sufficient training data are available, these al-gorithms already perform well after parameter tuning, leaving limited room for DACMO’s LLM-based PAP construction to discover stronger alternatives. The ablation studies separately validate the effectiveness of DACMO’s two core innovations: the general-purpose multi-objective instance representation and generation method, and the LLM-based automatic PAP construction mechanism, collectively confirming DACMO’s strong performance as a general-purpose approach for con-structing PAPs. Finally, comparisons against the manually constructed Tun-ing and Default baselines show that, across all evaluated problem classes, all four automatic PAP construction meth-ods (DACMO, NoAlgDesign, CEPS, and NoInsGen) sub-stantially outperform these manual baselines. These results highlight the practical importance of automatic PAP construc-tion, especially general-purpose approaches, for MOBOPs: they deliver significant performance gains without requiring additional expert labor. 

E. Visual Analysis of Generated NIRs 

To answer RQ3 , we provide a qualitative visual analysis of whether generated NIRs exhibit characteristics consistent with real instances from the target problem class. Specifically, we compare the objective space shapes of training instances, test instances, and new NIRs randomly generated based on the trained NIR framework introduced in Section IV-A. In-stances within the same problem class typically exhibit sim-ilar objective-space shape patterns, whereas instances from different problem classes often show substantially different structures. Since objective space shapes in 3-dimensional space are difficult to distinguish clearly, only the three bi-objective optimization problem classes are visualized. Results are presented in Fig. 3. For objective space visualization, 100,000 solutions are randomly sampled for each instance and NIR, and their cor-IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 12 

TABLE III MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF NORMALIZED HV P ERFORMANCE FOR DACMO-C ONSTRUCTED PAP S UNDER AAS S TRATEGIES COMPARED TO CLASSIC MOEA S ACROSS CLASSES AND DIMENSIONS , I NCLUDING AGGREGATED MEAN HV PER DOMAIN . DACMO O RACLE RESULTS ARE FOR 

REFERENCE ONLY , E XCLUDED FROM ALL COMPARISONS AND p = 0 .05 WILCOXON SIGNED -R ANK TESTS (O NLY WORST /R ANDOM AAS S TRATEGIES AND CLASSIC MOEA S ARE COMPARED ). B EST PERFORMANCE PER DOMAIN /D IMENSION IS BOLDED WITH GRAY BACKGROUND ; P ERFORMANCE 

NOT SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT FROM THE BEST IS UNDERLINED ; H IGHER VALUES INDICATE BETTER PERFORMANCE 

Domain Dim DACMO NSGA-II NSGA-III SPEA2 MOEA/D Oracle Worst Random MMMP 32 1.2885±0.047 1.2406±0.050 1.2659±0.049 1.1181±0.048 1.1715±0.058 1.1122±0.045 1.0824±0.041 48 1.5726±0.109 1.4862±0.097 1.5326±0.104 1.1838±0.066 1.3749±0.099 1.1550±0.060 1.1265±0.065 64 1.8270±0.102 1.7063±0.107 1.7708±0.102 1.2496±0.054 1.4941±0.085 1.1833±0.055 1.1529±0.057 100 2.1721±0.178 1.9785±0.150 2.0738±0.158 1.2625±0.066 1.6247±0.109 1.2219±0.068 1.1604±0.047 Total 1.715 1.603 1.661 1.204 1.416 1.168 1.131 MKP 32 0.9893±0.027 0.9403±0.027 0.9628±0.025 0.9554±0.035 0.9683±0.021 0.9577±0.026 0.9667±0.029 48 1.0067±0.041 0.9400±0.056 0.9723±0.033 0.9593±0.027 0.9677±0.039 0.9550±0.046 0.9557±0.041 64 1.0105±0.036 0.9526±0.032 0.9810±0.029 0.9732±0.034 0.9757±0.029 0.9669±0.023 0.9752±0.031 100 1.0169±0.042 0.9564±0.046 0.9850±0.043 0.9685±0.033 0.9750±0.039 0.9644±0.039 0.9706±0.046 Total 1.006 0.947 0.975 0.964 0.972 0.961 0.967 MCCP 32 1.3197±0.042 1.2895±0.043 1.3049±0.042 1.0576±0.046 1.1463±0.051 1.1285±0.042 1.0834±0.037 48 1.6817±0.095 1.5472±0.103 1.6238±0.087 1.1480±0.092 1.2378±0.088 1.2013±0.076 1.1588±0.045 64 2.0079±0.147 1.7733±0.141 1.8984±0.123 1.0976±0.093 1.2416±0.094 1.1633±0.089 1.1369±0.081 100 2.3522±0.209 1.9674±0.171 2.1628±0.164 1.0869±0.083 1.2010±0.117 1.2072±0.098 1.1149±0.081 Total 1.840 1.644 1.747 1.098 1.207 1.175 1.124 MCIMP 32 1.1638±0.126 1.1494±0.119 1.1569±0.123 1.0103±0.087 1.0295±0.125 1.0057±0.109 0.9289±0.106 48 1.3514±0.209 1.3352±0.206 1.3435±0.208 1.0230±0.085 1.0816±0.117 1.0171±0.076 0.9771±0.057 64 1.5501±0.303 1.5256±0.296 1.5379±0.299 1.0490±0.062 1.1203±0.099 1.0446±0.068 0.9977±0.050 100 1.8309±0.483 1.7993±0.467 1.8164±0.475 1.0223±0.067 1.0989±0.144 1.0164±0.058 0.9621±0.072 Total 1.474 1.452 1.464 1.026 1.083 1.021 0.966 

responding objective values are evaluated and plotted on a 2-dimensional plane to characterize the objective space distribu-tion. When generating new NIRs, the learned Seq2Seq module and hypernetwork are fixed, and new instance embeddings are sampled from a normal distribution. Due to space limitations, Fig. 3 includes all 5 training instances, together with 2 test instances and 2 randomly generated NIRs for each of the 4 test dimensions. Objective space visualizations for all test instances are provided in Appendix C of the supplementary material. As shown in Fig. 3, distinct objective space shapes are ob-served across different problem classes. The objective spaces of newly generated NIRs exhibit salient characteristics con-sistent with those of real instances from the target problem class. Furthermore, even though no 100-dimensional instances are present in the training set, the generated 100-dimensional NIRs still show objective space patterns consistent with those of real instances. These observations suggest that NIR provides a class-consistent representation for instance generation and has the potential to support cross-dimensional generation. Test instances are observed to exhibit more diverse shapes than randomly generated NIRs. This is expected, as NIRs can learn only from a small number of training instances, whereas the test distribution is inherently broader. This limited training coverage restricts the diversity of generated NIRs, which is an inherent limitation of the few-shot scenario. Additionally, for MKP, points in the objective spaces of real instances are more concentrated than those of NIRs. This is due to the application of constraint-handling techniques, which result in a large number of solutions with identical objective values in real instances. As NIRs are essentially neural networks that approximate the mapping from solutions to objective values for real instances, their outputs inevitably contain small deviations from the ground truth, leading to more dispersed points in the objective space of NIRs. 

F. AAS Performance with PAPs as Candidate Pools 

To answer RQ4 , Table III compares the performance of AAS using DACMO-constructed PAPs as candidate configuration pools against standalone classic MOEAs. As discussed in Section I and Section II, PAPs are valuable not only for parallel problem solving but also as high-quality candidate configura-tion pools for AAS. Table III shows that even the worst-case AAS strategy, which always selects the poorest-performing PAP member for each instance, outperforms standalone classic MOEAs on all problem classes except MKP. For MKP, where classic MOEAs are already strong, the mean performance of random selection from the DACMO PAP still exceeds that of any individual classic MOEA. Since practical AAS methods are expected to outperform random selection when informative instance features are available, these results indicate that using DACMO-constructed PAPs as AAS candidate pools provides substantial performance improvements over directly deploying classic MOEAs in multi-objective optimization scenarios. 

G. Additional Analysis of PAP Performance via Co-Evolution 

To further analyze how PAP performance changes during DACMO’s co-evolution process, Fig. 4 presents the test set performance of PAPs obtained during the initialization phase and after each co-evolution round. Six PAPs are evaluated: the “Default” PAP constructed from classic MOEAs with IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 13 Default Init 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 Iteration Round Hypervolume HV Performance on MMMP 

> 32 48 64 100 Total Dim

(a) Default Init 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1.00 0.98 0.99 1.01 1.02 Iteration Round Hypervolume HV Performance on MKP  

> 32 48 64 100 Total Dim

(b) Default Init 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 Iteration Round Hypervolume HV Performance on MCCP  

> 32 48 64 100 Total Dim

(c) Default Init 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Iteration Round Hypervolume HV Performance on MCIMP  

> 32 48 64 100 Total Dim

(d)  

> Fig. 4. Performance trends of DACMO-constructed PAPs on test instances across multiple co-evolution rounds. Each subplot shows the mean normalized HV performance across different instance dimensions for a specific problem class, with “Total” representing the aggregate mean performance across all dimensions. (a) MMMP. (b) MKP. (c) MCCP. (d) MCIMP.

literature-recommended parameters before initialization, the “Init” PAP obtained after the initialization phase, and four PAPs obtained after the four co-evolution rounds. The plots show the mean performance for different instance dimensions as well as the aggregate mean across all dimensions for each domain. Results in Fig. 4 validate that DACMO’s co-evolutionary mechanism effectively improves the performance of PAPs on unseen test instances, with distinct improvement patterns observed across different problem classes. For MCIMP and MMMP, performance improves consistently across all co-evolution rounds. For MCCP, performance exhibits no im-provement in the first two rounds before increasing substan-tially in the final two rounds. A plausible explanation for this pattern is that instances generated in the first two rounds, while challenging for the current PAP and distinct from the initial training set, do not align well with the true test distribution, and instances generated in the final two rounds may align well with the test distribution. This inherent limitation is unavoidable in practice, as the underlying true test distribution is not known in advance, but our results demonstrate that multi-round co-evolution effectively mitigates this issue. For MKP, performance improves stably in the first two rounds but fluctuates in the final two rounds, with alternating per-formance gains and losses across different dimensions. This performance pattern is attributed to the random sampling of instance dimensions from the current training set during generation, which leads to imbalanced numbers of instances across dimensions, combined with the high sensitivity of PAP member configurations’ performance on MKP instances to problem dimensionality. This finding highlights the need for better dimension selection strategies for cross-dimensional instance generation, a promising direction for future work. Notably, the initial training set and all generated in-stances have dimensions ranging from 32 to 64. Neverthe-less, across all domains, PAPs obtained after multi-round co-evolution achieve significant performance improvements on 100-dimensional test instances, which are typically more challenging to solve under limited function evaluation bud-gets. This result demonstrates that DACMO-constructed PAPs exhibit strong generalization to higher-dimensional instances beyond the range observed during training. VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

This work proposes DACMO, the first general-purpose method for automatic PAP construction on MOBOPs. By integrating a domain-agnostic neural instance representation for multi-objective instance generation and LLM-based au-tomatic PAP construction in a competitive co-evolutionary framework, DACMO automatically generates high-performing PAPs without requiring problem-specific expert knowledge. Experimental results on four diverse problem classes show that DACMO consistently outperforms manually configured classic multi-objective evolutionary algorithms by significant margins. Notably, as a general-purpose method, DACMO is competitive with a state-of-the-art approach relying on manu-ally designed problem-specific instance generators, even out-performing it on two of the four evaluated problem classes. It also demonstrates strong generalization to instance dimensions beyond those observed during training. This work represents a step toward fully automated opti-mization algorithm design that reduces the need for human expertise in both algorithm configuration and problem domain knowledge. Future work will focus on developing an intel-ligent instance dimension selection mechanism to improve problem space coverage during co-evolution, and extending the proposed approach to other optimization problem types, in-cluding combinatorial and continuous optimization domains. REFERENCES [1] C. A. C. Coello, G. B. Lamont, and D. A. van Veldhuizen, Evolutionary algorithms for solving multi-objective problems, Second Edition , ser. Genetic and evolutionary computation series. Springer, 2007. [2] W. Wei, R. Yang, H. Gu, W. Zhao, C. Chen, and S. Wan, “Multi-objective optimization for resource allocation in vehicular cloud com-puting networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 25 536–25 545, 2022. [3] X. He, Q. Pan, L. Gao, L. Wang, and P. N. Suganthan, “A greedy cooperative co-evolutionary algorithm with problem-specific knowledge for multiobjective flowshop group scheduling problems,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 430–444, 2023. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 14 

[4] L. Zhong, W. Li, K. Gao, L. He, and Y. Zhou, “An improved NSGAII for integrated container scheduling problems with two transshipment routes,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 14 586– 14 599, 2024. [5] W. Hong, C. Qian, and K. Tang, “Efficient minimum cost seed selection with theoretical guarantees for competitive influence maximization,” 

IEEE Trans. Cybern. , vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 6091–6104, 2021. [6] C. Huang, Y. Li, and X. Yao, “A survey of automatic parameter tuning methods for metaheuristics,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 201–216, 2020. [7] C. Ans´ otegui, Y. Malitsky, H. Samulowitz, M. Sellmann, and K. Tier-ney, “Model-based genetic algorithms for algorithm configuration,” in 

Proceedings of IJCAI 2015, Buenos Aires, Argentina , pp. 733–739. [8] L.-I. Manuel, D.-L. J´ er´ emie, P. C. Leslie, B. Mauro, and S. Thomas, “The irace package: Iterated racing for automatic algorithm configura-tion,” Oper. Res. Perspect. , vol. 3, pp. 43–58, 2016. [9] F. Hutter, H. H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown, “Sequential model-based optimization for general algorithm configuration,” in Proceedings of LION 2011, Rome, Italy , vol. 6683, pp. 507–523. [10] S. Liu, K. Tang, Y. Lei, and X. Yao, “On performance estimation in automatic algorithm configuration,” in Proceedings of AAAI 2020, NY, USA , pp. 2384–2391. [11] M. Lindauer, H. H. Hoos, K. Leyton-Brown, and T. Schaub, “Automatic construction of parallel portfolios via algorithm configuration,” Artif. Intell. , vol. 244, pp. 272–290, 2017. [12] S. Kadioglu, Y. Malitsky, M. Sellmann, and K. Tierney, “ISAC -instance-specific algorithm configuration,” in Proceedings of ECAI 2010, Lisbon, Portugal , vol. 215, pp. 751–756. [13] L. Xu, H. H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown, “Hydra: Automatically configuring algorithms for portfolio-based selection,” in Proceedings of AAAI 2010, GA, USA , pp. 210–216. [14] S. Liu, K. Tang, and X. Yao, “Automatic construction of parallel portfolios via explicit instance grouping,” in Proceedings of AAAI 2019, HI, USA , pp. 1560–1567. [15] B. A. Huberman, R. M. Lukose, and T. Hogg, “An economics approach to hard computational problems,” Science , vol. 275, no. 5296, pp. 51–54, 1997. [16] C. P. Gomes and B. Selman, “Algorithm portfolios,” Artif. Intell. , vol. 126, no. 1-2, pp. 43–62, 2001. [17] R. W. Hockney and C. R. Jesshope, Parallel Computers 2: architecture, programming and algorithms . CRC Press, 2019. [18] K. Tang and X. Yao, “Learn to optimize-a brief overview,” Natl. Sci. Rev. , vol. 11, no. 8, p. nwae132, 2024. [19] K. Smith-Miles and S. Bowly, “Generating new test instances by evolving in instance space,” Comput. Oper. Res. , vol. 63, pp. 102–113, 2015. [20] K. Tang, S. Liu, P. Yang, and X. Yao, “Few-shots parallel algorithm portfolio construction via co-evolution,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. ,vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 595–607, 2021. [21] S. Liu, K. Tang, and X. Yao, “Generative adversarial construction of parallel portfolios,” IEEE Trans. Cybern. , vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 784–795, 2022. [22] C. Wang, Z. Yu, S. McAleer, T. Yu, and Y. Yang, “ASP: learn a universal neural solver!” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 4102–4114, 2024. [23] Z. Wang, S. Liu, P. Yang, and K. Tang, “Evolving generalizable parallel algorithm portfolios for binary optimization problems via domain-agnostic instance generation,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. Early Access, no. 1, pp. 1–1, 2025. [24] T. Guo, Y. Mei, M. Zhang, K. Tang, K. Cai, and W. Du, “Enhanced evolution of parallel algorithm portfolio for vehicle routing problem via transfer optimization,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. Early Access, no. 1, pp. 1–1, 2025. [25] R. Tanabe and A. Oyama, “Benchmarking moeas for multi- and many-objective optimization using an unbounded external archive,” in Proceed-ings of GECCO 2017, NY, USA , P. A. N. Bosman, Ed., pp. 633–640. [26] H. Li, K. Deb, Q. Zhang, P. N. Suganthan, and L. Chen, “Comparison between MOEA/D and NSGA-III on a set of novel many and multi-objective benchmark problems with challenging difficulties,” Swarm Evol. Comput. , vol. 46, pp. 104–117, 2019. [27] H. Ishibuchi, R. Imada, Y. Setoguchi, and Y. Nojima, “Performance comparison of NSGA-II and NSGA-III on various many-objective test problems,” in Proceedings of CEC 2016, BC, Canada , pp. 3045–3052. [28] B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, M. Balog, M. P. Kumar, E. Dupont, F. J. R. Ruiz, J. S. Ellenberg, P. Wang, O. Fawzi, P. Kohli, and A. Fawzi, “Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models,” Nat. , vol. 625, no. 7995, pp. 468–475, 2024. [29] F. Liu, X. Tong, M. Yuan, X. Lin, F. Luo, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, and Q. Zhang, “Evolution of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language model,” in Proceedings of ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria , pp. 32 201–32 223. [30] H. Ye, J. Wang, Z. Cao, F. Berto, C. Hua, H. Kim, J. Park, and G. Song, “Reevo: Large language models as hyper-heuristics with reflective evolution,” in Proceedings of NeurIPS 2024, BC, Canada .[31] S. Zhang, S. Liu, N. Lu, J. Wu, J. Liu, Y.-S. Ong, and K. Tang, “LLM-driven instance-specific heuristic generation and selection,” CoRR , vol. abs/2506.00490, 2025. [32] Z. Zheng, Z. Xie, Z. Wang, and B. Hooi, “Monte carlo tree search for comprehensive exploration in LLM-based automatic heuristic design,” in Proceedings of ICML 2025, BC, Canada .[33] N. van Stein, D. Vermetten, and T. B¨ ack, “In-the-loop hyper-parameter optimization for LLM-based automated design of heuristics,” ACM Trans. Evol. Learn. Optim. , 2025. [34] C. Jiang, X. Shu, H. Qian, X. Lu, J. Zhou, A. Zhou, and Y. Yu, “LLMOPT: learning to define and solve general optimization problems from scratch,” in Proceedings of ICLR 2025, Singapore .[35] S. Yao, F. Liu, X. Lin, Z. Lu, Z. Wang, and Q. Zhang, “Multi-objective evolution of heuristic using large language model,” in Proceedings of AAAI 2025, PA, USA , pp. 27 144–27 152. [36] H. M. Hieu, H. Phan, T. D. Doan, T. Dao, C. D. Tran, and H. T. T. Binh, “Pareto-grid-guided large language models for fast and high-quality heuristics design in multi-objective combinatorial optimization,” in Proceedings of AAAI 2026, Singapore , pp. 36 964–36 972. [37] F. Liu, X. Lin, S. Yao, Z. Wang, X. Tong, M. Yuan, and Q. Zhang, “Large language model for multiobjective evolutionary optimization,” in Proceedings of EMO 2025, ACT, Australia , pp. 178–191. [38] Y. Huang, S. Wu, W. Zhang, J. Wu, L. Feng, and K. C. Tan, “Au-tonomous multi-objective optimization using large language model,” 

IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. Early Access, pp. 1–1, 2025. [39] K. Deb, S. Agrawal, A. Pratap, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. ,vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002. [40] K. Deb and H. Jain, “An evolutionary many-objective optimization algorithm using reference-point-based nondominated sorting approach, part I: solving problems with box constraints,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 577–601, 2014. [41] Q. Zhang and H. Li, “MOEA/D: A multiobjective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 712–731, 2007. [42] E. Zitzler, M. Laumanns, and L. Thiele, “SPEA2: Improving the strength pareto evolutionary algorithm,” TIK report , vol. 103, 2001. [43] M. Cui, L. Li, M. Zhou, and A. Abusorrah, “Surrogate-assisted autoencoder-embedded evolutionary optimization algorithm to solve high-dimensional expensive problems,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. ,vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 676–689, 2022. [44] Q. Yang, Z. Zhan, X. Liu, J. Li, and J. Zhang, “Grid classification-based surrogate-assisted particle swarm optimization for expensive multiob-jective optimization,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1867–1881, 2024. [45] F. Sehnke, C. Osendorfer, T. R¨ uckstieß, A. Graves, J. Peters, and J. Schmidhuber, “Parameter-exploring policy gradients,” Neural Netw. ,vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 551–559, 2010. [46] B. Doerr, W. Gao, and F. Neumann, “Runtime analysis of evolutionary diversity maximization for oneminmax,” in Proceedings of GECCO 2016, CO, USA , pp. 557–564. [47] A. Jaszkiewicz, “On the performance of multiple-objective genetic local search on the 0/1 knapsack problem - a comparative experiment,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 402–412, 2002. [48] Y. Hu, J. Hu, Y. Xu, F. Wang, and R. Cao, “Contamination control in food supply chain,” in Proceedings of WSC 2010, MD, USA , pp. 2678– 2681. [49] C. Oh, J. M. Tomczak, E. Gavves, and M. Welling, “Combinatorial bayesian optimization using the graph cartesian product,” in Proceedings of NeurIPS 2019, BC, Canada , pp. 2910–2920. [50] W. Lu, W. Chen, and L. V. S. Lakshmanan, “From competition to complementarity: Comparative influence diffusion and maximization,” 

Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 60–71, 2015. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 15 

# Supplementary for “General-Purpose Co-Evolutionary Construction of Parallel Algorithm Portfolios for Multi-Objective Binary Optimization” 

APPENDIX AUSING PGPE TO GENERATE CHALLENGING NIR S

Algorithm 3: Using PGPE in the NIR-based Mutation Operator 

Input: Problem instance represented as NIR m, PAP P .

Output: Mutated instance represented as NIR m′.

1 Initialize PGPE’s parameters σinit (initial standard deviation vector), αμ (learning rate of mean value), ασ (learning rate of standard deviation), σlimit (lower bound of the standard deviation); 

2 μ ← instance embedding e of m;

3 σ ← σinit ;

4 m′, f ′ ← m, f (P, m );

5 for iter ← 1 to M axIter do 

6 e1, e2, · · · , eN ← randomly sample N embedding vectors from N (μ, σ);

7 eN +i ← 2μ − ei, where i = 1 , 2, · · · , N ;

8 ϵ1, ϵ2, · · · , ϵN ← e1 − μ, e2 − μ, · · · , eN − μ;

9 μ, σ, ei, ϵi are de-dimensional vectors; 

10 mi is the instance that replaces the problem instance embedding vector of m by ei;

11 mb is the instance that replaces the problem instance embedding vector of m by μ;

12 fi ← f (P, m i), where i = 1 , 2, · · · , 2N ;

13 fb ← f (P, m b);

14 m⋆ ← the instance in {m1, m 2, · · · , m 2N , m b} with the lowest performance f⋆;

15 if f⋆ ≤ f ′ then m′, f ′ ← m⋆, f ⋆;

16 M ← a N × de matrix, and Mij = ϵ(j) 

> i

;

17 f M ← [f1 − fN +1 , f 2 − fN +2 , · · · , f N − f2N ];

18 S ← a N × de matrix, and Sij =



ϵ(j)

> i

2

− σ2

> i

σi

;

19 f S ←

h f1+fN +1  

> 2

− fb, f2+fN +2  

> 2

− fb, · · · , fN +f2N 

> 2

− fb

i

;

20 μ, σ ← μ + αμMf M , σ + ασ Sf S  

> σlimit

;

21 end 

22 return m′

For the NIR-based instance generation detailed in Sec-tion IV-C, PGPE [45] serves as the black-box continuous optimizer; the complete procedure is outlined in Alg. 3. The method employs a symmetric sampling exploration strategy (lines 6–9) alongside a strategy update mechanism (lines 16–20), using an iteratively updated multivariate Gaussian distribution to navigate the vector space of problem instance embeddings. During this exploration process, the embedding vector achieving the lowest f value replaces the original vector in m, resulting in a new NIR m′ that constitutes the generated problem instance (line 15). The hyperparameters in Alg. 3 are configured as σinit =

1, αμ = 0 .05 , ασ = 0 .1, and σlimit = 0 .01 . Unlike the recommended settings in [45], we deliberately select a larger 

σ and a lower ασ to promote the discovery of more diverse solutions. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 16 

APPENDIX BPROMPT USED IN THE LLM-BASED ALGORITHM 

GENERATION 

A. Implementation Note on Objective Direction 

The problem formulations in the main paper are written under a unified maximization convention. In implementation, our MOEA framework follows the standard minimization interface. Therefore, for any problem instance, all objective values are multiplied by −1 before being passed to the MOEA framework, so that maximizing the original objectives is converted into minimizing the transformed objectives. This sign transformation preserves Pareto dominance after reversing the optimization direction and therefore does not change the corresponding Pareto-optimal solution set. This explains why the LLM prompt specifies minimization objectives, while the mathematical formulations and reported HV results in the paper follow the original maximization convention. 

B. LLM Prompt Templates 

In the PAP evolution process introduced in Section III-B, large language models (LLMs) are employed to generate novel optimization algorithms and their corresponding configuration spaces. The Kimi-K2.5 model provided by OpenRouter is adopted as the LLM backend for this procedure. To ensure structured and parseable outputs, the LLM is explicitly required to return responses in JSON format via the built-in “JSON Output” functionality. Strict formatting con-straints are repeatedly emphasized in both the system prompt and user prompt to guarantee the validity of the returned JSON structure. The system prompt explicitly instructs the LLM to return only valid JSON strings and provides a predefined JSON schema template for reference. The system prompt is as follows: 

The output result must contain only one JSON, and the JSON template is: ‘‘‘json {"hyperparameters": [{"name": "hyperparameter name", "type": "hyperparameter type. The value of this field should be astring. The value can only be: \"int\" or \"float\" or \"bool\"", "default": "default value of hyperparameter. The type of the value in this field needs to correspond to the type of the hyperparameter, not be of the str type.", "categorical": "true or false, the hyperparameter is categorical or not. The value of this field should be a bool value. It should be noted that even for variables of type int, if their optional values are within a range rather than just a few specific values, then categorical should be set to false. For example, 

population size is an integer, but since its value can be any integer within a range, categorical should be false.", "range": "range of the hyperparameter, list with length 2 if hyperparameter is not categorical, set if hyperparameter is categorical", "description": "description of the hyperparameter" }], "code": " The program code of the algorithm ", "description": "description of algorithm" }‘‘‘ 

In the user prompt, the MOEA framework defined in Alg. 2 is first presented, followed by a restatement of the required JSON schema. The LLM is then instructed to design novel optimization algorithms based on the given MOEA frame-work, leveraging performance metrics of existing algorithms and their corresponding parameter configurations. Detailed specifications of the required output content and formatting constraints are further clarified to eliminate ambiguity. The user prompt is as follows: 

There is a python file "moea.py" with the content following: ‘‘‘Python # moea.py from src.types_ import * class MOEA: def __init__(self, max_eval: int, objective_num: int, dim: int, bound_val: List[List[float]], eval_func: Callable[[np.ndarray], np.ndarray], hyper_param: Dict): self.max_eval: int = max_eval ... def run(self): curr_pop, curr_objs =self.initialization() while self.eval_time <self.max_eval: offsprings, offspring_objs = self.gen_offsprings(curr_pop, curr_objs) curr_pop, curr_objs =self.update(curr_pop, offsprings, curr_objs, offspring_objs) return self.get_known_solutions() ‘‘‘ There is also a JSON file "json_template.json" with the content following: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 17 

‘‘‘json {"hyperparameters": [... "description": "description of algorithm" }‘‘‘ I need you to use the MOEA class in the given moea.py file as the parent class to implement a complete code for an optimization algorithm for 0-1 multi-objective optimization problems. The dimension of the optimization problem is 32-100, the number of objectives is 2-3, and all are minimization objectives. The algorithm needs to implement a class named NewMOEA that inherits from the MOEA class and implements the three methods initialization(), gen_offsprings(), and update(). The parameter lists of these methods must not be changed when implementing. At the same time, all hyperparameter lists required for implementation should be placed separately in MOEA.hyper_param. Do not modify the "__init__" function, "evaluate" function, and "run" function, but directly inherit the methods from the MOEA class! The statement to import the MOEA class is "from src.moea.moea import MOEA". The code also needs "from src.types_ import *" to import some custom type names. When implementing the new optimization algorithm, you can analyze and design based on some currently implemented algorithms and their performance. The code, description, and performance of these algorithms using the listed hyperparameter values on a problem instance set used for verifying performance are as follows: Performance Summary of Solvers --- Solver 0 ---Description: NSGA-II (Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II) is a popular multi-objective evolutionary algorithm, ... Code: ‘‘‘Python from src.moea.moea import MOEA from src.types_ import * import numpy as np from typing import List, Tuple, Dict, Set import random class NewMOEA(MOEA): def _non_dominated_sort(self, objs: 

NpArray) -> Tuple[List[List[int]], NpArray]: """Fast non-dominated sorting algorithm.""" n = len(objs) S: Dict[int, Set[int]] = {i: set() for i in range(n)} ... ‘‘‘ Hyper-parameters: ‘‘‘JSON {"pop_size": 143, "crossover_rate": 0.8996722666924, "mutation_rate": 0.0198469733669, "tournament_size": 10} ‘‘‘ HV Performance across all NIRs: NIR 0 (dim=32): HV=0.890960, Rank=3 NIR 1 (dim=40): HV=0.988416, Rank=1 ... Overall Rank Statistics: Rank 1: 2 times Rank 2: 1 times ... --- Solver 1 ---... --- Solver 2 ---... --- Solver 3 ---... Rank Statistics by Dimension --- Dimension 32 ---Solver 0: Rank 3: 1 times ... --- Dimension 40 ---... --- Dimension 48 ---... --- Dimension 56 ---... --- Dimension 64 ---... Please refer to existing methods and their performance to implement acomplete code for an optimization algorithm for 0-1 multi-objective optimization problems. The dimension of the optimization problem is 32-100, the number of objectives is 2-3, and all are minimization objectives. The algorithm needs to implement a class named NewMOEA that inherits from the MOEA class. Please IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 18 

return the implementation result in JSON format according to the format in the json_template.json file. In the "hyperparameters" field, all required hyperparameters need to be listed separately with recommended default values and ranges. Hyperparameters can only be of int, float, or bool types. The "categorical" should indicate the hyperparameter is categorical or not. It should be noted that even for variables of type int, if their optional values are within a range rather than just a few specific values, then categorical should be set to false. For example, population size is an integer, but since its value can be any integer within a range, categorical should be false. For not categorical ranges (whether int or float), the "range" field should contain two elements representing the start and end of the hyperparameter range; for categorical ranges, the range field should contain all candidate values. The description of this algorithm should be placed in the "description" field. The complete code file of the implemented new algorithm should be placed in the "code" field. Please note that the new algorithm must be implemented as described above. The parameter lists of the initialization(), gen_offsprings(), and update() methods must not be changed when implementing. Do not modify the "__init__" function, "evaluate" function, and run function, but directly inherit from the MOEA class. At the same time, all hyperparameter lists required for implementation should be placed separately in MOEA.hyper_param. All evaluations of the solution should be performed through the self.evaluate() method, and direct calls to self.eval_func are strictly prohibited. Do not modify the "__init__" function, "evaluate" function, and "run" function. These three functions must not appear in the generated code, otherwise it will be considered an error! Must return in the given JSON format! The complete code needs to be placed directly in the "code" field, not expressed in separate functions. The final JSON only contains one "code" field. Again, the implemented class name is NewMOEA, and the generated code must not contain the "__init__" function, "evaluate" function, and "run" function. Please ensure that 

the generated code is correct and meets the requirements of multi-objective minimization optimization algorithms. In addition, it is necessary to carefully check whether the generated code will cause array out-of-bounds errors. When determining whether a variable is None, the statement "if var is not None" must be used accurately but not "if var" only. All evaluations of the solution should be performed through the self.evaluate() method, and direct calls to self.eval_func are strictly prohibited. The output MUST be ONLY a valid JSON string that strictly matches the template provided above. No extra text, explanation, or content is allowed. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 19 

APPENDIX COBJECTIVE SPACE VISUALIZATIONS FOR ALL TEST 

INSTANCES 

Figs. 5-7 present the objective spaces of all test instances used in the experiments. For each problem class, there are 4 distinct instance dimensions: 32, 48, 64, and 100, with 30 independent instances for each dimension. 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Fig. 5. Objective space visualization for all test instances of MKP. Each subplot presents the objective space visualizations of the instances with different dimensions. (a) d = 32 . (b) d = 48 . (c) d = 64 . (d) d = 100 .IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 20 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Fig. 6. Objective space visualization for all test instances of MCCP. Each subplot presents the objective space visualizations of the instances with different dimensions. (a) d = 32 . (b) d = 48 . (c) d = 64 . (d) d = 100 .IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX 21 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Fig. 7. Objective space visualization for all test instances of MCIMP. Each subplot presents the objective space visualizations of the instances with different dimensions. (a) d = 32 . (b) d = 48 . (c) d = 64 . (d) d = 100 .