Title: Synolog: A Scalable Synteny-Based Framework for Genome Architecture Characterization

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 56

Markdown Content:
Synolog: A Scalable Synteny -Based Framework for Genome Architecture 

Characterization 

Giovanni Madrigal 1, Julian Catchen 1* 

> 1

Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Behavior, University of Illinois at Urbana -

Champaign 

> *

Corresponding author: jcatchen@illinois.edu 

Abstract 

Detailing the genomic architecture across multiple organisms has been a task 

performed for decades. The continuing growth of genomic datasets not only serves as a 

resource for studying genome evolution but warrants the availability of scalable and 

user -fri endly software for processing these datasets. Here, we present Synolog, a 

bioinformatic toolkit that can automatically identify orthologs for both protein -coding and 

non -coding genes, synteny clusters across two or more genomes, as well as 

retrogenes, and segmental duplications. Applying Synolog, we illustrate cases of local 

gene expansions in ecologically disparate turtle species, identify synteny clusters 

across hundreds of millions of years of metazoan evolution, and reconstruct 

chromosome -level assembli es in teleosts using the inferred synteny clusters; all using 

its integrated visual features. In parallel, we compare our orthogroup method to that of 

commonly used software and note the tradeoffs of making inferences solely based on 

sequence similarity ve rsus a synteny -based approach. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Introduction 

The architecture of a eukaryotic genome is described by the organization and structure 

of a set of genomic elements – from simple sequences to information -rich, large -scale 

structured DNA – and the chromosomes that encapsulate these elements. This 

organization evolves over time yet must be stable enough to produce a functional 

physiology and ensure fitness (Misteli 2007; Rowley and Corces 2018) . Characterizing 

genome architecture has proved to be useful in several biological fields . For example, 

by analyzing genome architecture, researchers have been able to illuminate 

phylogenetic relationships (Simakov et al. 2020) , identify highly diverged homologs 

(Pegueroles et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2026) , and study the evolution of gene families 

(Harduin -Lepers et al. 2008; Widdison and Coffey 2011; Zhang et al. 2024) . Although 

genome architecture can be examined from different aspects , o ne approach for 

surveying the structure of two or more genomes is by identifying orthologs and 

examining their arrangement and structure across the focal genomes. 

Orthologs are genes separated by one or more speciation event s. One method for 

detecting orthologs is by comparing sequences (e.g., using BLAST (Altschul et al. 

1990) ), which allow s for the identification of reciprocal best hits (RBHs) – a pair of 

genes that are best matched with one another based on sequence similarity. Given 

location information, a set of genome s can be screened for regions containing 

colocalized orthologs. The se gen omic neighborhoods that persist through evolutionary 

time are said to display conserved synteny. Several bioinformatic tools that employ 

orthologs to detect conserved synteny have been published (f or a review, see 

Lallemand et al. 2020 ); however, a number of these software s require homology 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

relationships to be pr edetermined (Ludwig and Mrázek 2024; Parey et al. 2020; Zhang 

et al. 2025) . One popular tool used for inferring ortholog s is OrthoFinder 2 (Emms and 

Kelly 2019) . Under the OrthoFinder 2 framework, p rotein -coding genes are grouped into 

an orthogroup based on a corrected sequence similarity score . This approach proves 

favorable i n cases where only a single copy of a gene exists within each genome .

However, paralogs (gene s arising from duplication events independent of speciatio n)

that retain a notable amount of their sequence composition hinder ortholog inference. 

By considering the genetic neighborhoods a set of homologs reside in, one may 

illuminate the evolutionary relationship between these elements (Catchen et al. 2009) .

In cases where gene duplicates are found in tandem, in particular when the duplication 

events are recent in evolutionary time (Kono et al. 2018) , discriminating between 

orthologs and paralogs may be challenging even under manual curation (Ye et al. 2016; 

Martinez Gomez et al. 2021) . The ortholog conjecture suggests that in this case, the 

orthologs would be more similar to one another in composition and function than they 

would be to paralogs (Peterson et al. 2009; Studer and Robinson -Rechavi 2009; Perez 

et al. 2025) ; however, it is conceivable that paralogs may retain their ancestral function 

while selection is relaxed on the duplicated ortholog (Nehrt et al. 2011) , or sequence 

homology and function may be maintained in both copies via subfunctionalization 

(Force et al. 1999) .

In the context of conserved synteny, identifying one -to -one orthologs may not be 

necessary, as tandem duplicates can still be used to represent the homologous locus. 

For example, M CScanX (Wang et al. 2012) represents a set of tandem duplicates using 

the gene duplicate with the highest sequence similarity to the corresponding ortholog ,

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

while OrthoRefine (Ludwig and Mrázek 2024) permits paralogs to be merged into a 

synteny block if the neighboring homologs are found to be part of the same predefined 

hierarchical orthogroup (HOG). This flexibility allows for the construction of larger 

synteny blocks and permits the discovery of local gene expansions and contractions. 

The extent to which these benefits are realized, however, is not solely determined by 

the ortholog representation strategy employed. 

Outside of tandemly duplicated paralogs, another type of duplication that can be 

inferred using sequence similarity and positional information are segmental duplications. 

These genomic features are duplicated, non -overlapping regions in a genome that can 

be thousands of base pairs in length (Bailey et al. 2001) and are considered as a major 

source of evolutionary novelty (Flagel and Wendel 2009; Vollger et al. 2022) . For 

instance, genes found in segmental duplications have been reported to be involved in 

disease resistance (Marques -Bonet et al. 2009) , cellular housekeeping (Cannon et al. 

2004) , and the regulation of metabolic processes (Li et al. 2024) , highlighting their 

incorporation and maintenance over evolutionary time. Although synteny has been used 

to detect these genomic segments (Haas et al. 2004) , more commonly used 

approaches involve aligning a genome or sequence to itself (Numanagić et al. 2018a; 

Hanke and Dagan 2025) or aligning the constituting contigs a reference genome 

(Dallery et al. 2017) .

When gene copies occur outside of syntenic blocks, it can be difficult to differentiate 

paralogs from orthologs and grouping these types of genes based only on RBH 

information can be misleading (Watanabe et al. 2023) . However, sequence similarity 

and gene localities can be applied to pinpoint retrogenes – duplicated genes generated 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

through retrotransposition (Weiner et al. 1986; Brosius 1991) . A notable, but not 

constant, feature of these types of elements is a lack of introns (Brosius 1991) and 

regulatory elements (Mighell et al. 2000) , a poly(A) tail and adjacent repetitive 

sequences (Vanin 1985) . These elements are often inserted in a location distant from 

the paralogous copy (Dai et al. 2006; Cusack and Wolfe 2007) ; information that has 

previously been implemented for retrogene identification (Carelli et al. 2016) . Therefore, 

the spatial relationship between retrogenes and their parental copies renders conserved 

synteny a robust basis for retrogene identification. 

As evolutionary distance (i.e., time since the last common ancestor) increases between 

two species, the more likely processes such as gene conversion, gene loss or gain, and 

small insertions or deletions can blur orthologous relationships (Dalquen et al. 2013) . As 

such, ad hoc methods are routinely implemented to form orthogroups for the analysis of 

deep phylogenies (Zeng et al. 2017; Walden and Schranz 2023; Simakov et al. 2020; 

Lai et al. 2025; Alam et al. 2025) . It has previously been reported that the formation of 

orthogroups through an RBH or similar approach could introduce phylogenetic error if 

the aim is to reconstruct a species tree (Koski and Golding 2001) . Although some 

studies have used synteny to refine the predicted orthogroups, these research efforts 

required the use of multiple or custom software s (Simakov et al. 2020; Walden and 

Schranz 2023; Alam et al. 2025) , highlighting the need for a single resource for inferring 

orthogroups that leverages both sequence similarity and synteny. 

Synteny can be used to clarify orthologous relationships amongst a set of genes 

between two or more distantly related taxa but can also define orthogroups for relatively 

fast -evolving loci between closely related taxa (Pegueroles et al. 2019) . Compared to 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

protein -coding genes, genomic elements such as non -coding RNAs (ncRNAs) have 

been applied to a lesser extent to identify both orthogroups and synteny blocks. This is 

partially due to the low sequence -conservation between homologs (Noviello et al. 2018) ,

yet previous work has shown that ncRNA can be used to find homologs between 

distantly related taxa such as humans and zebrafish ( Danio rerio ) (Hezroni et al. 2015) .

Furthermore, not only can ncRNA represent a considerable proportion of an organism’s 

gene content (Wallberg et al. 2019) , the plethora of biological functions these elements 

are predicted to exhibit (reviewed in Mattick et al. 2023) make these loci an invaluable 

resource for comparative genomics (Lee et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2025) .

The size of a synteny block is largely influenced by the quality of the genome assembly 

used (Liu et al. 2018) and the evolutionary distance between focal genomes. Intuitively, 

syntenic regions that are split across different genomic contigs or scaffolds are reported 

as separate synteny blocks. Several tools have been developed to take advantage of 

synteny to scaffold fragmented assemblies by using a more complete reference 

genome from an evolutionarily close relative to guide the scaffolding process (Aganezov 

et al. 2015; Aganezov and Alekseyev 2016; Bao et al. 2014; Tamazian et al. 2016; 

Anselmetti et al. 2018; Waterhouse et al. 2020) ; yet these scaffolding -centered tools 

depend on users applying other software to obtain syntenic information for their 

genomes of interest. 

Long -read sequencing and chromosomal capture libraires ha ve accelerated the number 

of high -quality genomes sequenced and assembled, enabling researchers to examine 

genome architecture across div erse and large datasets . This increase in genomic data 

warrants a scalable framework to process these large datasets and readily obtain 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

results. Here, we present Synolog, an automated framework for identifying ortho groups 

for both protein -coding and non -coding genes , conserved synteny, segmental 

duplications and other genomic features . The core of Synolog is implemented in C++, 

with utilities provided in Python for business logic and visualization with virtually no 

dependencies. The system operates on a set of standard files describing the set of 

genomes of interest (e.g., FASTA, AGP, GT F) and provides convenient exports for 

further analysi s (e.g., a gene counts file or orthogroup -specific FASTA files ).

In this work, we demonstrate Synolog’s utility across a diverse set of taxonomic groups 

and illustrate its ability to generate a chromosome -level assembly using the predicted 

synteny clusters. We applied the Synolog pipeline cross three datasets that compr ise of 

a wide range of evolutionary time scales, ecologies, and genome architectures. In the 

first case study, we examine species in the order Testudines and compare our ortholog 

inference algorithm to that of OrthoFinder2, while simultaneously using synte ny to 

uncover genomic features that may be associated with ecological adaptation. In our 

second investigation, we again compare our ortholog inference method to that with 

OrthoFinder2, this time demonstrating the identification of synteny clusters in a dee p

phylogeny. For the last case study, we demonstrate the utility of our synteny scaffolding 

pipeline by generating chromosome -level sequences from contig -level genome 

assemblies of notothenioid fishes. These results highlight the variety of biological 

ques tions that can be addressed with Synolog while demonstrating its novelty in the 

field of comparative genomics. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Results 

Building upon the previous works of Catchen et al. (2009 ) and Small et al. (2016 ), we 

developed Synolog, a framework for synteny -based analyses to identify orthogroups, 

conserved synteny blocks, segmental duplications, and retrogenes. Before presenting 

the results of three case studies, we first describe how the software works, with details 

in the Methods below. 

One of the barriers to genome architecture analysis is the number and type of data files 

required to describe it. When analyzing a small number of genomes, Synolog can be 

directly executed on the command line with the genome data files directly provided. 

However, once an analysis reaches a certain size, Synolog provides the species cache ,

which is an organized set of data, including gene locations (GTF/GFF files), genome 

structure (AGP files), precomputed BLAST hits of different types, among others (Fig. 

1A ). This cache is managed by the synolog_cctl.py program and the user 

adds/removes/changes files for an analysis using this interface. When using the species 

cache, it is provided to the core Synolog program which understands the cache and 

where to find the appropriate data within it. Several other util ities are provided to 

facilitate the collection of BLAST hits for the genomes in the species cache. 

The execution of the core Synolog program begins with the identification of all pairwise 

RBHs (Fig. 1B) , after which the analysis employs a sliding window to construct an initial 

set of synteny blocks based on co -localized orthologs across these comparisons (Fig. 

1C). Initially designed to work in this pairwise manner, Synolog is now capable of using 

phylogenetic information , when the user supplies a tree, to guide the analysis to 

compare the most closely related species and mov e towards more distantly related taxa 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

in search of syntenic orthologs (Fig. 1D) . Taking this phylogenetic tree into context, 

syntenic orthologs are scanned for orthogroups that concordantly span the phylogeny ,

creating an initial set of phylogenetic anchors (Fig. 1E) . These syntenic tree -spanning 

phylogenetic anchors are then subjected to a tandem duplication algorithm, where a 

sliding window is used to identify adjacent gene duplicates for a given phylogenetic 

anchor using the other anchors in the current syntenic group (Fig. 1F). 

Once the initial synteny clusters and orthologs are identified , Synolog applies an 

iterative approach in which a modified RBH (mRBH) method is used to detect additional 

orthologs within a shared synteny block, progressively expanding the set of synteny 

blocks (Fig. 1G). Following , additional phylogenetic anchors can then be constructed 

(Fig. 1H) and subjected to a tandem duplicate search (Fig. 1I). This process is repeated 

until no new information can be obtained, at which point the inferred orthogroups and 

synteny clusters are reported (Fig. 1J). Pairwise synteny blocks and phylogenetic 

information can then be leveraged together to perform a tree clustering algorithm ,

producing synteny clusters that span three or more species based on their shared 

syntenic orthologs (Fig. 1K). Additionally, each orthogroup is evaluated for local gene 

contractions and expansions by designating the most basal species as a reference 

point, enabling the identification of reduced or increased gene copy numbers across the 

more der ived species (Fig. 1K). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 1: Illustration of the Synolog pipeline. (A) The structure of the genomes and the BLAST hits between genomes 

are stored into the species cache prior to beginning a comparative analysis. (B) The pipeline begins by inferring 

reciprocal best hits (RBHs) betwee n the queried organisms prior to (C) establishing the initial synteny clusters using a 

sliding window technique. If a phylogenetic tree is provided, (D) the organisms are linearally organized based on the 

provided phylogeny, which is then used to (E) detec t tree spanning anchors (syntenic orthologs across all organisms 

in the tree) and (F) conduct an initial tandem duplication search. (G) Genes that did not have a syntenic RBH or 

marked as duplicates are then subjected to continuous iterations of a modified RBH (mRBH) algorithm that further 

builds the inferred synteny clusters until no new homologs can be detected. If phylogenetic information is present, 

(H) new anchors (which may or may not extend across the tree) are determined (H) followed by (I) another tandem 

duplicate search. (J) Orthogroups and pairwise synteny clusters are generated once there are no updates to the 

orthogroups and synteny clusters. (K) Assuming that a phylogenetic tree is available for guidance, local gene 

contractions and expansions relative to the most basal organism are inferred, along with synteny clusters spanning 

three or more organisms (i.e., tree clusters) and pairwise segmental duplications. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Synolog also leverages its inferred pairwise synteny blocks to identify additional 

genomic features beyond orthologs. Segmental duplications are detected by first 

examining the syntenic orthologs within each synteny block to identify foreign paralogs 

(i.e., paralogs outside of the known synteny block) . A sliding window is then emplo yed to 

construct gene neighborhoods resembling the original synteny block based on these 

foreign paralogs. Retrogene identification is achieved through a complementary 

approach, whereby multi -exon orthologs are used to identify single -exon paralogs 

located on a distant chromosome. 

To aid researchers in their analyses, we provide users with an easy -to -use Python 

program to immediately visualize their results ( synolog_plot.py ). We additionally 

developed a synteny -based scaffolding procedure that uses the inferred synteny blocks 

to scaffold a set of contigs into a chromosome -level assembly, enabling more robust 

downstream analyses ( synolog_collinearize.py ). We also provide program s to 

provide detailed information on the Synolog analysis for particular genes or synteny 

blocks ( synolog_ info .py ) as well as to export sequences from the different, defined 

groupings described above ( synolog_fasta.py ). 

Case Study 1: T estudine Evolution 

Turtles have been described as a slowly evolving lineage relative to other taxonomic 

groups (Shaffer et al. 2013) , yet they have evolved to inhabit a diverse array of 

environments from the sea to the desert (Ernst et al. 1998) . In a previous study, Arant es 

et al. (2025 ) revealed a high level of conserved synteny across 11 species of testudines 

representing five ecotypes; however, this effort was focused on sea turtles and the 

orthologs used were detected using a conservative RBH methodology. Here, we 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

inferred conserved synteny across five species spanning five ecologically distinct 

habitats and more than 100 million years of evolution (Arantes et al. 2025) . These 

species include the green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas ; marine ), the diamondback 

terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin centrata ; estuarine -adapted ), the red -eared slider 

(Trachemys scripta elegans ; freshwater ) the Aldabra giant tortoise (Aldabrachelys 

gigantea ; terrestrial vegetative ) and the Mexican gopher tortoise (Gopherus 

flavomarginatus ; terrestrial desert ). Although the c hromosome -level genome assemblies 

obtained for each species were comparable in size (approximately 2.21 -2.25 Gb), the 

haploid chromoso me number varied , with three species possessing 25 chromosomes, 

the Aldabra giant tortoise retaining 26, and the green sea turtle at 28 (Wang et al. 2013; 

Jiang et al. 202 5; Simison et al. 2020; Çilingir et al. 2022; 

http://www.vertebrategenomesproject.org/ ). Moreover, the total number of genes , both 

coding and non -coding, also differed between species, with a difference of more than 

10,000 genes between the Aldabra giant tortoise and the red -eared slider (Simison et al. 

2020; Çilingir et al. 2022) . We processed this data through Synolog and used the 

phylogeny reported by Thomson et al. (2021) to guide the algorithm. 

After applying Synolog, we found that the overall number of protein -coding genes 

grouped into an orthogroup is comparable to that reported by OrthoFinder2 (Fig. 2A). In 

three out of the three species, Synolog detected slightly more protein -coding orthologs 

than Synolog (Table S1) ; however, with the inclusion of non -coding genes, Synolog 

identifies several thousand more orthologs than OrthoFinder2 for all five species (Fig. 

2A). The proportion of protein -coding genes placed into an orthogroup was over 90% fo r

four of the five species by both methods, while Synolog assigned approximately 2,000 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

non -coding genes in each species (Fig. 2A). Exact gene and ortholog counts for each 

species can be viewed in Table S 1.

Using the synolog_plot.py subprogram, it is apparent that conserved synteny is 

largely kept intact across the genomes despite the karyotype and ecological differences 

between the species (Fig. 2B). Synolog’s automatic tree cluster inference algorithm 

identified 916 tree clusters, of which 208 clusters contained genes from all five species 

and with 2 7 consisting of at least 1,000 orthologs across the five species. Although 

these results align with those reported by Arantes et al. (2025), Synolog generated them 

without intervention and produced visualizations without relying on third -party software. 

Synolog reported a total of 19,862 orthogroups containing 107,667 orthologs across the 

five turtle genomes. Of these 19,862 orthogroups, 12,201 (61.42%) were identified as 

one -to -one orthogroups, i.e., one ortholog from each of the five species. OrthoFinde r2 

reported 99,219 protein -coding genes encompassed in 17,990 orthogroups. Of these 

17,990 orthogroups, 361 orthogroups containing 3,472 genes were flagged as species -

specific – emphasizing that OrthoFinder2 will report groups of orthologs that consist of 

genes entirely from one species (Fig. 2A). Removing these paralogous gene groups 

reduced the orthogroups to 17,629 and orthologs to 95,747. Interestingly, 2,150 of these 

reported paralogs were placed in an orthogroup by Synolog. To illustrate an example, 

OrthoFinder2 placed two LTA4H -like genes in the red -eared slider into a single 

paralogous group; however, Synolog was able to classify these two genes as tandem 

duplicated genes to the adjacent LTA4H gene and merge them into the respective 

orthogroup (Fig. S1). Similar circumstances likely resulted in OrthoFinder2 reporting 261 

more single -copy orthogroups than Synolog. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Synolog is not limited to protein -coding genes (in contrast to OrthoFinder 2) and can also 

examine non -coding genes. In total, Synolog reported 11,725 non -coding genes 

compiled into 2,905 orthogroups. Many of these genes are syntenic and found as 

tandem duplicates. As an example, we observed a case on chromosome 2 where the 

CCM2 and NACAD -like gene are flanked by syntenic non -coding genes (Fig. S2) . Along 

this chromosome , we also identified a locus containing variable numbers of non -coding 

homologs between all five species, including a lineage -specific loss of non -coding 

elements in the red -eared slider (Fig. S3), Lastly , Synolog’s tree clustering algorithm 

identified 2, 881 tree -spanning non -coding orthologs embedded alongside 60 tree -

spanning orthogroups 

Amongst the orthologs reported, Synolog labeled 49 3 genes as candidate retrogene s.

The number of predicted retrogenes varied across the turtle species ; 184 retrogenes for 

the Aldabra giant tortois e, 113 for the diamondback terrapin , 82 for the Mexican gopher 

tortoise, 7 8 for the green sea turtle, and 3 6 for the red -eared slider. To note an example, 

Synolog was able to identify three interferon retrogenes in the Mexican gopher tortoise, 

a gene family that has been reported to evolve via retro trans position in primates 

(Schelle et al. 2023) . OrthoFinder2 grouped these three genes within the same 

paralogous orthogroup but was unable to identify their retrogene nature .

We further sought to associate genomic features with environmental adaptation by 

identifying increased gene copy numbers for potentially ecologically relevant genes. In 

our analyses, we found 20 orthogroups where strictly terrestrial turtles had a higher 

copy number than their counterparts and 41 orthogroups for which higher copy number 

was observed in strictly aquatic species. Additionally, a total of 40 orthogroups had 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

higher copy numbers for species adapted to saline waters. Considering turtle species 

individually, we found 77 , 95, and 796 orthogroups in which the Mexican gopher 

tortoise , the green sea turtle, and Aldabra giant tortoise had the highest gene counts, 

respectively, representing species -specific local gene expansions .

To further ground Synolog’s results with turtle biology, we performed a gene ontology 

(GO ) annotation analysis on the orthogroups identified and found a number of biological 

processes that are consistent with environmental adaptation . For example, the GO 

terms water transport ( GO:0006833 ), urea transmembrane transport (GO:0071918 ), 

regulation of heart rate by cardiac conduction (GO:0086091 ), and embryonic skeletal 

system development (GO:0048706 ) were found in orthogroups that contain more gene 

copies in spe cies inhabiting aquatic habitats compared to the strictly terrestrial species. 

For species adapted to terrestrial environments, we found fewer enriched GO terms ,

with examples such as response to regulation of cytokine production (GO:0001817 ) and 

positive regulation of smooth muscle cell proliferation (GO:0048661 ). For the green sea 

turtle and the diamondback terrapin , two species that experience saline conditions, we 

found orthogroups linked to biological processes such as regulation of protein folding 

(GO:0006457 ) and the G protein -coupled receptor signaling pathway (GO:0007186 ),

which may play a role in maintaining protein stability and increas ed tolerance under 

salinity stress (Misra et al. 2007; Leprêtre et al. 2025) .

To note specific genes that may be involved in ecological adaptation, we present a case 

with ACOT13 , which was found to be tandemly duplicated exclusively in the Mexican 

gopher tortoise (Fig. 2C). Copy number variation of this gene has previously been 

associated with desert adaptation (Chebii et al. 2021) , which may aid in fat storage, an 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

advantageous trait given the sparse nutritional resources found in desert environments 

(Olsen et al. 2021) . To illustrate a second case, we found 16 tandem duplicates of C -

type lectin domain family genes in chromosome 5 of the Aldabra giant tortoise (Fig. 2D). 

Although it is unclear whether these genes may have played a role in environmental 

adaptation, C -type lectin genes are recognized as a marker for Kupffer cells in mouse 

models (Yang et al. 2013) , which are cells involved in the liver’s immune response. 

Experimental validation conducted by Jiang et al. (2021) showed that CLEC4F is 

essential for Kupffer cells to clear desialyated platelets during a bacterial infection. In 

another example, RGS5 is found as a single copy in two tortoise species but tandemly 

duplicated in the other turtles and annotated as RGS4 (Fig. 2E). Interestingly, p revious 

work has reported changes in gene expression of RGS4 in response to different salinity 

treatments in a semi -anadromous fish (Komoroske et al. 2016) , while RGS5 has been 

noted to increase in expression in hypoxic conditions (Jin et al. 2009) .

Lastly, we inspected the reported pairwise segmental duplications inferred by Synolog 

for possible ecologically relevant genes. In one example, when comparing the Aldabra 

giant tortoise to the Mexican gopher tortoise, we found a segmental duplication in the 

Aldabra giant tortoise containing two copies of an uncharacterized protein resembling 

F54H12 , a gene described as a longevity gene in Caenorhabditis elegans (Hamilton et 

al. 2005) (Fig. 2F). The remaining genes contained in this segmental duplication were 

non -coding genes. In another instance, we f ound a segmental duplication in the 

diamondback terrapin harboring EIF4A1 , a gene that has been reported to influence salt 

tolerance in rice (Chen et al. 2025) , and GNB2 , a gene highlighted by Marques et al. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(2021 ) when investigating the genomic differences between marine and freshwater 

threespine stickleback ( Gasterosteus aculeatus ) (Fig . 2G).

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 2:  Overview of ortholog inferences and conserved synteny across testudines. (A) The number of protein -coding orthologs is 

> comparable between OrthoFinder2 and Synolog; however, including non -coding genes yielded more orthologs in general. (B) Turtle species
> ar e arranged in the tree based on the phylogeny in Thompson et al. (2021), with the Mexican golpher tortoise ( Gopherus flavomarginatus ) at
> the top, followed by the Aldabra giant tortoise ( Aldabrachelys gigantea ), the red -eared slider ( Trachemys scr ipta elegans ), the diamondback
> terrapin ( Malaclemys terrapin centrata ), and the green sea turtle ( Chelonia mydas ). The phylogenetic tree is annotated with a cartoon of the
> type of habitat occupied by each species. Genome -wide synteny plot generated by Synolog depicts widespread conserved synteny across all
> species. Regional plots produced by Synolog illustrate examp les of local expansions, where (C) there is a tandem duplication of ACOT13 in
> the Mexican gopher tortoise, (D) a large local expansion of C -typ e lectin genes in the Aldabra giant tortoise relative to other turtles, and (E) a
> difference in copy number of RGS genes where terrestrial tortoises contain a single copy while turtles that experience aquati c or marine
> environments have two copies. The ord ering of species for the regional plots mimics the ordering in A. Outside the synteny clusters, (F) three
> genes, one being noted as a longevity -related gene, are segmentally duplicated and expanded across two chromosomes in the Aldabra giant
> tortoise relat ive to the Mexican tortoise. In another case, (G) three segmentally duplicated genes, two of which have been documented to be
> involved in environmental adaptation, are detected in the diamondback terrapin when compared to the red -eared slider.
> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Case Study 2: Metazoan Evolution 

Motivated by the application of synteny to analyze genome architecture across very 

distantly related taxa, we sought to replicate the work of Simakov et al. (2022), who 

used synteny to study genome evolution spanning more than 600 million years of 

metazoan history (Yin et al. 2015) . However, instead of recapitulating their bespoke 

analysis, we wanted to see how our automated approach would compare. We applied 

Synolog to infer orthologs and conserved synteny on the same distantly related species 

used by Simakov et al. (2022): the Flo rida lancelet ( Branchiostoma floridae ), the flame 

jellyfish ( Rhopilema esculentum ), the Yesso scallop ( Patinopecten yessoensis ), the 

Mueller’s freshwater sponge ( Ephydatia muelleri ), and the freshwater polyp ( Hydra 

vulgaris ). Expectedly, there is a conside rable amount of variation in genome 

architecture between these organisms. For example, the flame jellyfish possess a 

genome size estimated at 275 Mb and haploid chromosome number of 21 (Li et al. 

2020) ; whereas the Yesso scallop has a genome size at roughly 1.43 Gb and a haploid 

chromosome number of n = 19 (Wang et al. 2017) . Similarly, the number of protein -

coding genes also considerably differs between these five species. The ~326 Mb 

genome for Mueller’s freshwater sponge is predicted to have over 39,000 protein -coding 

genes while the smaller genome of the flame jellyfish i s reported to harbor less than 

15,000 protein -coding genes (Kenny et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020) .

Considering that these species have not shared a common ancestor for over 600 million 

years (Yin et al. 2015) , we ran Synolog with a relaxed sequence similarity threshold 

(defined in the Methods) during tandem duplication assignments. Synolog identified 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

53,035 orthologs organized into 11,172 orthogroups. For each species, OrthoFinder2 

reported more orthologs than Synolog; however, we found many of the reported genes 

to be encompassed in species -specific groups (Fig. 3A). Excluding the single -species 

ortho groups, OrthoFinder2 reported 63,265 orthologs within 10,424 orthogroups, 2,197 

of which were s ingle -copy orthogroups. In the work of Simakov et al. (2022), a total of 

2,361 mutual best hits (MBHs) were used to reconstruct conserved, ancient linkage 

groups (ALGs). In our analysis, Synolog identified 2,325 single -copy orthogroups. The 

number of predicted orthologs from both methods can be seen in Table S 2.

When visualizing all the syntenic relationships inferred, the presence of ALGs is masked 

by the presence of non -collinear orthologs and lineage -specific losses (Fig. 3B); 

however, these genomic elements become more apparent when restricting the view to 

syntenic genes spanning the phylogeny (Fig. 3C), which are natively produced by 

Synolog. Our tree cluster algorithm identified 3 85 tree clusters containing syntenic 

genes from all five species. The reported tree clusters were then further processed to 

identify ALGs by selecting only those containing genes across all five species and 

merging them based on the encompassing chromosomes. This resulted in 3 5 putative 

AL Gs that contained 3,5 25 genes. Upon removing ALG clusters that contained less than 

two genes per species (i.e., clusters not containing syntenic co -localized elements) , the 

number of candidate ALGs reduces to 2 6 clusters harboring 3,4 80 genes. Simakov et 

al. (2022) reported 29 ALGs, which were composed of 2,361 MBH clusters of orthologs. 

In agreement with the original analysis, our analysis found that some ALGs are isolated 

to single chromosomes while other ALGs share chromosomal assign ments within a 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

single species (Simakov et al. 2022) . While minor differences in the ALGs are observed 

relative to Simakov et al. (2022), these likely reflect the distinction between their manual 

curation approach and the automated pipeline employed by Synolog. 

Figure 3: Ortholog inference and automatic detection of conserved synteny across metazoans. (A) Ortholog inference 

for protein -coding genes by Synolog and OrthoFinder2. (B) Synolog is able to identify conserved synteny between 

distantly related metazoans. In B, the Yasso scallop ( Patinopecten yessoensis ) is shown at the top of the synteny 

plot, followed by the Florida Lancelet ( Branchiostoma floridae ), the freshwater polyp ( Hydra vulgaris ), the flame 

jellyfish ( Rhopilema esculentum ), and the freshwater sponge ( Ephyda tia muelleri ) at the bottom. (C) Synolog 

illustration that depicts the subset of orthologs that syntenically agree across all species .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Case Study 3: Synteny -Based Scaffolding 

To further leverage the syntenic information discovered by Synolog, we developed a 

genome scaffolding approach that uses the inferred synteny clusters to generate 

chromosome -level genome assemblies. With the increasing number of publicly 

available chromoso me -level reference genomes, researchers can use these resources 

to guide the scaffolding processing of a more fragmented assembly. Consequently, by 

feeding Synolog the synteny clusters between two species, with one to serve as the 

guide or template assembl y and the other as the guided genome assembly, Synolog 

can identify the orientation and placement of sequences within the guided assembly to 

maximize the collinearity between the two genomes. This arrangement can be 

determined by employing the synolog_collinearize.py while the contigs and/or 

scaffolds can be physically fused using the alter_genome_structure.py utility. 

For a proof of concept, we sought to re construct chromosome -level assemblies for the 

mackerel icefish ( Champsocephalus gunnari ) and the Antarctic bald notothen 

(Trematomus borchgrevinki ) using only contig -level assemblies and synteny information .

As members of the Antarctic notothenioid radiation, these two species have sho wn high 

levels of conserved synteny with the Patagonia n blennie ( Eleginops maclovinus )

(Rivera -Colón et al. 2023; Cheng et al. 2023; Rayamajhi et al. 2025) , a basal non -

Antarctic notothenioid, despite not sharing a common ancestor for tens of millions of 

years (Bista et al. 2023) . Consequently, we chose to use E. maclovinus as a template 

for our scaffolding approach. 

Using the chromosome -level assembly of E. maclovinus (Cheng et al. 2023) and the 

phylogeny predicted by Near et al. (2018), we performed an initial Synolog analysis with 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

all three species to generate pairwise synteny clusters. The 

synolog_collinearize.py script was used to automatically calculate collinearity 

between the E. maclovinus reference genome and either the C. gunnari or T. 

borchgrevinki contig -level assemblies, respectively. The script uses a linear regression 

algorithm to order contigs into scaffolds by permuting contig order and continually 

recalculating an R 2 value describing how tightly orthologous genes are ordered between 

the two genomes. The highest R 2 valu es reported were 0.964 and 0.958 for C. gunnari 

and T. borchgrevinki respectively (Fig. 4A and 4B). The contig -level assemblies were 

then scaffolded using alter_genome_structure.py (Fig. 4C). The new assemblies 

showed one -to -one homology with the chromosomal sequences in E. maclovinus (Fig. 

4D and 4E) after rerunning the Synolog pipeline with the newly fused set of scaffolds. 

These results presented similar findings to the genome -wide synteny results from 

Rivera -Colón et al. (2023) and Rayamajhi et al. (202 5), respectively (Fig. 4F). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The L50 and N50 metrics of the synteny -scaffolded genomes were measured at 12 and 

39.01 Megabases (Mb) for C. gunnari and 13 and 33.77 Mb for T. borchgrevinki ,

reflecting strong concordance with the original Hi -C-based assemblies (Table S 3). For 

both synteny -based assemblies, 24 sequences were designated as chromosomes 

based on the homologous chromosomes found in E. maclovinus (Fig . 4D and 4E; but 

Figure 4: An overview of the synteny scaffolding process in notothenioids. The contig -level assemblies for the 

mackerel icefish ( Champsocephalus gunnari ) and the Antarctic bald notothen ( Trematomous borchgrevinki ) were 

processed through the synteny scaffolding procedure. Synolog examines different orderings of contigs by estimating 

collinearity through a linear regression using the synte ny blocks. (A) In one arrangement between the Patagonia 

blennie ( Eleginops maclovinus ) and the mackerel icefish, Synolog preferred the arrangement with an R 2 of 0.964 over 

an arrangement with an R 2 of 0.959. (B) Similarly, Synolog selected an ordering with an R 2 of 0.958 over an 

arrangement with an R 2 of 0.952 when comparing the Patagonia ble nnie with the Antactic bald notothen. (C) The 

selected arrangements were both used to scaffold the contigs using the syntenic information. (D, E) Both the new 

assemblies show one -to -one homology with Patagonia blennie ( Eleginops maclovinus ) chromosome -level assembly. 

(F) A three -way synteny plot s hows the mackerel icefish is the topmost genome, followed by the Antarctic bald 

notothen, and then the Patagonia blennie as the outgroup. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

see Discussion ). The percentage of base pairs incorporated into these chromosom al 

sequences is limited by the presence of orthologous genes and differ ed between the 

two species, with the chromosome -level sequences containing 90% of the reference 

genome for C. gunnari and ~83% for T. bor ch grevinki .

Discussion 

Ortholog inference and synteny detection are central components in the field of 

evolutionary gen omics . In this work, we present ed Synolog and illustrate d its versatility 

in several cases involving taxonomical groups of varying evolutionary distances. The 

incorporati on of phylogenetic information to guide a synteny -based homology search to 

construct orthogroups alleviates the need to compare a genome to itself in order to 

identify gene duplicates . Furthermore, by including non -coding RNAs and certain types 

of paralogs (e.g., retrogenes), Synolog is capable of ident ifying conserved synteny 

using overlooked genomic features and provide a higher resolution of chromosomal 

homology across distantly related species. 

Large, highly conserved syntenic regions amongst turtles has been previously identified 

by Arantes et al. (2025); however, by limiting their application to single -copy 

orthogroups, many interesting genomic features were left underexplored in their 

findings . By setting the most basal organism on a phylogenetic tree as a reference 

point, we can detect and label changes in gene copy number. Using ecologically 

disparate species, Synolog identified several candidate genes for ecological adaptation 

as either tand em duplicates or segmental duplications. Although OrthoFinder2 was able 

to find more protein -coding orthologs when considering all turtle species (Table S1), 

these genes are likely duplicated paralogs that reside outside the syntenic region 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

containing its progenitor. Compared to OrthoFinder2, Synolog’s ortholog inference 

strategy is more conservative given its prioritization on synteny . As such , Synolo g’s 

ortholog inference method is tailored towards identifying homologous regions and 

highlighting changes in genome architecture instead of clustering related homologs .

Furthermore , syntenic non -coding orthologs were automatically detected in our analysis, 

further capturing the full landscape of conserved genomic features. Th ese results 

illustrat e that syntenic non -coding genes can be readily detectable across large 

evolutionary timescales despite their rapid molecular evolution, highlighting their 

underutilized potential in comparative genomic analyses. 

While a basal organism is not equivalent to an ancestral species, we note our local 

expansions and contractions as relative to the most basal organism in the focal 

orthogroup ; an approach that has previously been shown to uncover evolutionary 

patterns (Kim et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2023; Melchionna et al. 2024) .

Additionally, o ther bioinformatics tools have employed a phylogenetic tree to serve as a 

guide tree (Kloss -Brandstätter et al. 2011; Roosaare et al. 2017; Balaban et al. 2019) ,

corroborating the implementation of a guide tree in our framework .

The results of Simakov et al. (2022) yielded enlightening insights into the evolution of 

metazoans. In this report, we were able to reproduce similar findings through a n

automated framework. Synolog recognized more single -copy orthogroups than 

OrthoFinder2 between these distantly related metazoans despite failing to group more 

orthologs overall; likely due to our practice of avoiding the incorporation of non -syntenic 

paral ogs into an orthogroup apart from candidate retrogenes. The ALGs inferred from 

the res ulting tree clusters were nearly identical in number to that found by Simakov et 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

al. (2022), with Synolog identifying three fewer ALG s. Though further analysis is 

required to elucidate the evolutionary histories of these ALGs, researchers interested in 

studying these genomic features can use Synolog to generate results as the basis for 

their investigations. 

In our third case study, we took advantage of syntenic information to scaffold a set of 

contigs into chromosome -level sequences, a procedure that also has been implemented 

elsewhere (Waterhouse et al. 2020) . The estimated collinearity between the two 

notothenioid genome assemblies with E. maclovinus was high (> 0.95 R 2) with both 

newly scaffolded assemblies containing most of the sequenced base pairs in 

chromosomes, indicating an algorithmic success. Though several contigs were unable 

to be incorporated into chromosomes due to the lack of annotated genes, this approach 

is a fast and cost -effective methodology to generate a chromosome -scale assembly in 

the absence of additional sequence data for the focal samp le. However, this approach is 

not without limitations, as synteny -guided scaffolding is sensitive to the evolutionary 

distances between guide and focal genomes. It is thus important to select a guide 

genome that shares a similar genome architecture as the organism in question. For 

example, the initial assembly of T. borchgrevinki was shown to have a chromosomal 

fusion relative to C. gunnari and E. maclovinus (Rayamajhi et al. 2025) , which resulted 

in 23 chromosomal sequences as opposed to 24. Consequently, this assembly remains 

incomplete, as the fused chromosome remains split in our approach. In cases like these 

and in absence of additional sequence data, bioinformatic approaches t hat leverage the 

initial raw reads to identify genome misassemblies exist (Madrigal et al. 2025) , providing 

a mechanism towards a more complete reference genome. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The application of Synolog is especially useful when generating new genome 

assemblies. It allows one to use conserved synteny to compare the accuracy of a new, 

draft assembly to earlier drafts, or to other assemblies, with the capability to manually 

make c hanges to those scaffold orders. The species cache and other tools provided 

with Synolog make this type of application relatively easy and was applied in several 

notothenioid genomes (Rivera -Colón et al. 2023; Rayamajhi et al. 2025) .

Altogether, we present Synolog and illustrate its ability to infer orthologs at both the 

protein and nucleotide level, construct synteny blocks both pairwise and across the 

three or more organisms as guided with a phylogenetic tree, and leverage syntenic 

information to identify segmental duplications, retrogenes, and scaffold a queried 

genome. With the growing number of genome assemblies becoming readily available, 

user -friendly tools for large -scale comparative genomic studies opens the door for 

researcher s to conduct such studies and identify novel genomic insights without prior 

knowledge of the underlying architecture. At the time of writing, Synolog is designed to 

work on genes (coding and non -coding); however, this framework sets the basis for 

additiona l genome markers (e.g., transposable elements) to be used in future iterations. 

As such, Synolog will prove useful to address questions regarding genome architecture 

and provide researchers a user -friendly approach for detailing their findings. 

The core of Synolog is implemented and parallelized in C++ with three sets of utility 

programs provided in Python. The first aids the user in organizing genome data, 

including genome annotations (GTF/GFF), genome structure (AGP), and gene models 

(FASTA) in a common location and executing programs such as BLAST. The second set 

of programs exports data in useful formats and aids in the scaffolding process. The final 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

set of utilities provides a robust set of visualization tools which can aid the user in 

understanding the produced data as well as creating publication -level images. Synolog 

is provided as open -source software can be downloaded from 

http://catchenlab.life.illinois.edu/synolog/. 

Methods 

To facilitate automation, Synolog is composed of three main components : the creation 

of a species cache , an orthogroups and conserved synteny analysis, and a post -

inference toolkit . To illustrate Synolog’s versatility, we apply Synolog on t hree different 

case studies while simultaneously comparing the resulting orthogroups to that of the 

commonly used software OrthoFinder2 for the first two investigations .

Creating The Species Cache 

The species cache serves to house the genomic data required to determine 

orthogroups and synteny blocks. This cache is simply an ordered set of directories on 

disk containing all the genome -affiliated files needed by Synolog for each stage of its 

analysis. For example, this includes GTF or GFF3 annotation files, FASTA gene model 

files, and sets of BLAST hits, among others. It is initialized and interacted with through 

Synolog’s utility synolog_cctl.py and once populated can be used for multiple 

Synolog anal yses containing different species subsets. The locations of genes along 

with their sequences are required entries in the cache for any given organism. Given 

that protein -coding genes can be represented in amino -acids while ncRNA sequences 

are managed at th e nucleotide level, these sequences are kept separate in the cache 

and only one dataset is required to include an organism in an analysis. In cases where 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ncRNAs are annotated but not contained in its own FASTA file, users can execute the 

synolog_ncgenes.py script to extract these elements out of the reference genome so 

that they can be added to the cache. 

Considering that a species can be represented with differing genome assemblies and 

gene annotations, Synolog labels each organism by a provided annotation and 

integration ID. Thus, multiple versions of a genome assembly/annotation set can be 

incorporated into a synteny analysis . To streamline the sequence comparisons amongst 

the integrated dataset , the synolog_blastctl.py script is used to launch and store a

BLAST analysis for each pairwise combination for the queried organism s or species .

Synolog separates genes based on their non -coding vs protein -coding status in the 

BLAST stage. Non -coding RNA has been noted to evolve at a higher rate than protein -

coding genes at the sequence level (reviewed in Bussotti et al. 2013 ). Previous efforts 

tailored towards non -coding RNA homology detection have employed BLAST with a 

shorten ed word_size parameter to accommodate this biology (Tang et al. 2017; Kern et 

al. 2018; Lemos et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2025) . Accordingly, Synolog executes a BLAST 

search using an adjustable, shorten ed word_size for non -coding RNA. 

Orthogroup And Conserved Synteny Analysis 

The primary analysis of Synolog is divided in to two pipelines , both executed by the 

parallelized, C++ -based, core executable synolog . The first pipeline identifies 

ortho groups and conserved synteny blocks in a pairwise manner across all the queried 

organisms. The second pipeline extends this approach by leverag ing phylogenetic 

information to detect other genomic features such as tandem duplicates, retrogenes, 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and segmental duplications. We first explain the algorithmic approach performed in both 

pipelines to infer orthogroups and conserved synteny blocks before noting the 

discrepancies in the pipelines. A summary of the Synolog pipeline is shown in Figure 1.

I. BLAST Processing 

For the initial phase, Synolog loads the genome structure prior to processing the BLAST 

hits from the species cache . A percent identity of 30% or more between protein 

sequences has been noted to hold merit when it comes to classifying homologs (Rost 

1999) . Knowingly, Synolog will only retain BLAST hits with a percent identity of 30% or 

higher ; however, in cases where no BLAST hits for a given gene meet this criterion, all 

BLAST hits for that gene are used. We then follow a similar approach as Catchen et al .

(2009 ) by reducing the BLAST hits between any two queries to the singular best hit 

based on e -value or bitscore (user defined) and then rank ing these hits . If the ranking 

scheme follows the e -value scheme, BLAST hits with a lower e -value are ranked higher 

than those with greater values. The ranking approach for bitscore runs counter to that of 

the e -value approach, with BLAST hits with lower bitscores being lowly ranked. Here, 

we note that unlike other methods, Synolog includes all gene transcripts in its analysis, 

and does not re duce BLAST hits for multi -transcripts genes to a set of BLAST hits from 

a singular representative transcript (usually the longest) . This approach diverges from 

previous methods that choose to either use a singular transcript based on its length 

(Emms and Kelly 2015) or the number of BLAST hits to the other queried organisms 

(Altenhoff et al. 2021) .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

II. Conserved Synteny Block Construction 

After processing the BLAST hits, gene pairs between two organisms exhibiting a RBH 

relationship are labeled as orthologs. The sliding window approach described in 

Catchen et al . (2009 ) is then used to establish the initial synteny blocks. Briefly, a sliding 

window of size N genes (default 100, but user modifiable ) is used to find regions 

between the two focal genomes where co -localized orthologs no greater than N genes 

apart can be grouped into a synteny block. This window is extended N genes for every 

addi tional incorporation and is implemented in the forward and reverse direction to 

account for orthologs that are in reverse orientations in one of the two organism s due to 

chromosomal rearrangements. Synteny blocks are then merged if the distance between 

the two blocks does not exceed N genes. 

Once synten ic information has been obtained, the analysis shifts to detect orthologs that 

do not exhibit a RBH relationship. For each un matched gene in the query organism, a

modified RBH (mRBH) approach is performed where BLAST hits are processed from 

the highest ranked to the lowest ranked for genes in the subject organism th at lack an 

ortholog to the query organism . Both un matched genes are evaluated to determine if 

they occupy a shared syntenic region between the query and subject organisms . If the 

two genes are show n to inhabit the same synteny block , they are marked as orthologs. 

After applying this mRBH approach , the synteny block algorithm is repeated to produce 

larger (i.e., more gene rich) synteny blocks. With an updated set of synteny blocks, the 

search for orthologs using the mRBH methodology and reconstruction of synteny blocks 

is continuously repeated until no orthologous pairings can be found to expand the 

synteny blocks. The pairwise synteny blocks and ortholog inferences are then reported 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

to the user. After all the pairwise comparisons have been concluded, orthologs across 

all the queried organisms are merged to form orthogroups. 

Pipeline 2: Applying A Guide Tree 

To enact the additional functionalities in Synolog (e.g., tandem duplication detection), a 

phylogenetic tree containing the species of interest is required (in Newick format) to 

guide the directionality of comparisons. The organisms are ordered linearly into a guide 

tree based on their position on the phylogenetic tree, where the outgroup is placed at 

the bottom of guide tree and the topmost position is assigned to the organism occupying 

the most nested clade. When two or more organisms are found within thi s clade, the 

assignment is dictated by the order in the provided phylogenetic tree. Once a tree is 

supplied, different subsets of species can be analyzed and Syn olog will prune the tree 

for the execution accordingly. In the beginning, this pipeline identifies orthologs 

exhibiting a RBH relationship and an initial set of synteny blocks identically to pipeline 1. 

III . Metric Score Correction 

Unlike the independent pairwise comparisons conducted in pipeline 1, the initial 

orthologs are evaluated for two properties: a set of orthologs (i.e., an orthogroup) that 

are able to unambiguously span the phylogenetic tree while remaining syntenic with one 

another . Thes e syntenic tree -spanning orthogroups are then used to compute a new 

scoring metric following the same logic as Emms and Kelly (2015 ) to correct for biased 

bitscores due to seq uence length . For each pairwise comparison, we apply the length 

no rmalization procedure in Emms and Kelly (2015 ) to calculate a linear regression using 

only the tree -spanning orthologs. The slope and intercept are then used to correct every 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

BLAST hit in the analysis and each gene then has its BLAST hits re -ranked based on 

this corrected metric . A standard deviation for each pairwise comparison is then 

determined using the corrected estimates . For ncRNAs, we apply the same formula but 

replace protein length with exonic length and keep the linear regression and standard 

deviation calculations separate from that of protein -coding genes. 

IV. Ortholog Refinement and Phylogenetic Anchor Construction 

Given that the initial set of orthologs (based on RBH s alone) was determined without 

synteny or a corrected metric, paired orthologs that lack synteny are recorded and 

undone for re -assignment. Given that syntenic homologs are preferred over non -

syntenic paralogs , we store these non -syntenic orthologs as backup orthologs to one 

another . The tree -spanning syntenic orthogroups are designated as phylogenetic 

anchors at this stage. 

V. Tandem Duplication Detection 

To detect tandem duplicates, we implement another sliding window of size D genes. For 

each gene in a phylogenetic anchor group, we test whether the upstream or 

downstream D genes could be a tandem duplicate of the focal anchor gene (Fig. 5A and 

5B). Let two organisms be denoted as species A and species B, their corresponding 

anchor genes be a and b, and a candidate duplicate as a’ . To determine whether a’ is a 

tandem duplicate of a without a direct comparison between the two, we examine the 

relationship between a’ and b. We classify a’ as a tandem duplicate if one of the three 

co nditions are met. If a’ has a BLAST hit to b and b is the top hit of a’ , a’ is flagged as a 

tandem duplicate (Fig. 5C). If this condition is not met, we compare the corrected 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

bitscore between a’ and b, labeled as h’ , to the highest corrected bitscore found for b

when comparing A and B, which we label as h (Fig. 5D). If h’ is within S standard 

deviations (user defined) from h or if the two hits have the same e -value, a’ is labeled as 

a tandem duplicate of a. We define this condition as the sequence similarity threshold 

condition. When neither of these conditions are satisfied, the neighboring D genes on 

both sides of b are scanned for genes that have their highest ranked BLAST hi t directed 

towards a’ , which we will denote as b’ . If b’ is already marked as a tandem duplicate to b

or if b’ has a BLAST hit to a and that corrected bitscore is within S standard deviations 

from the score between b’ and a’ , then a’ is designated as a tandem duplicate to a (Fig. 

5E). With the condition that a tandem duplicate is found, the search window is extended 

to the next D genes along the chromosome in the current window direction. A synopsis 

of the tandem duplication algorithm is illustrated in Figure 5. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Under the scenario where no tandem duplicates were found for A when using B for the 

current phylogenetic anchor group, the group is queried for the next member down the 

Figure 5: Summary of the tandem duplication algorithm. (A) Centering on an anchor gene, a sliding window is 

implemented in both the 3’ and 5’ directions to identify candidate tandem duplicates. (B) If a gene is marked as a 

tandem duplicate, it is merged to the ancho r gene, effectively becoming invisible in the Synolog pipeline (C). A gene 

is marked as a tandem duplicate if it’s best BLAST hit is the interspecific anchor gene. (D) If the first condition is not 

met and if the candidate tandem duplicate has a BLAST hit to the interspecific anchor gene, that BLAST hit is 

compared to the focal anchor gene BLAST hit to determine if it is within the threshold. (E) In cases where the first two 

conditions are not met, if the candidate tandem duplicate has a match wit h a tandem duplicate of the interspecific 

anchor gene, and the previously labeled tandem duplicate’s best hit is the current anchor gene, the BLAST hits are 

again evaluated to determine tandem duplicate status. (F) Figures and symbols depicting the variabl es used in the 

tandem duplication algorithm are shown in below. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

guide tree, which we represent as C. The search for tandem duplicates is then repeated 

using ortholog c in place of b.

VI . Updating Orthologs and Constructing Synteny Blocks 

Before commencing with further ortholog detection using synteny, tandem duplicates 

that are not members of a phylogenetic anchor group are excluded from ortholog 

inference and synteny block construction. This tactic not only allows other genes to 

become or thologs, but it effectively makes these elements invisible to the sliding 

window applications. As such, a window size of N or D can cover more genomic space 

as the tandem duplicates would not contribute to these windows. Post filtering, the 

ortholog detect ion and synteny block construction follows that which is describe d in 

pipeline 1. 

At the end of each iteration, new phylogenetic anchor groups are inferred without the 

requirement of enforcing the group to span the entire tree and for orthologs to contradict 

one another. For example, let’s consider a case with three organisms termed A, B, and 

C with homologs a, b, b’ , and c. If a and c were considered orthologs, but were 

assigned to b and b’ respectively, if b and b’ were found to be co -localized within the 

same synteny blocks , the 5’ most duplicate would become the core phylogenetic anc hor 

member while the other is flagged as a tandem duplicate. In the case where a is 

matched with b, b is matched with c, but no C ortholog was predicted for a, if there exist 

a bidirectional link between a and c from BLAST and these two genes are syntenic with 

b, then the phylogenetic anchor group can be assembled accordingly. Once no 

orthologs and tandem duplicates can be detected, the pairwise comparison ceases and 

the homolog relationships and synteny clusters are reported. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

VII . Orthogroup Characterization and Further Homolog Detection 

After all the pairwise comparisons have been completed, phylogenetic anchor groups 

are merged if the constituting members were marked as a tandem duplicate but was 

assigned as a phylogenetic anchor beforehand. This merging process reconstructs a 

single phy logenetic anchor group with the core members consisting of the 5’ most gene. 

Each new phylogenetic anchor group is then scrutinized by determining the most basal 

organism in the group. Here, basal is defined as the organism closest to the root . This 

gene a nd the number of tandem duplicates is used to set the basal state for the 

orthogroup of interest. The remaining core members are then evaluated to assign the 

following states: if the gene count is greater than the basal number, a local expansion is 

assigne d. When the gene count is lower than the basal number, a local contraction is 

granted to the homolog; otherwise, the gene retains a basal state. 

Every orthogroup is examined to determine if every organism in the analysis is 

represented within the group. For every organism not in the orthogroup, each current 

member will be examined for a previously recorded ortholog from the missing organism 

establi shed in the initial RBH approach. This backup ortholog is merged into the group if 

the ortholog is found to not be assigned to an orthogroup . In cases where multiple 

backup orthologs are found, the candidate orthologs are checked for shared synteny 

with the current core members and the first one meeting this criterion is selected. If no 

ortholog meets this condition, the first one reported is selected. 

After updating the orthogroups, each core member in an orthogroup that lacks tandem 

duplicates is checked for additional tandem duplicates using the other core members as 

point s of reference. This methodology serves to retrieve tandem duplicates for orthologs 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

that were not anchor genes (i.e., not syntenic). If we call the current core member a

from organism A and the current point of reference b from organism B, the search space 

is confined to all A genes matching b using the sequence similarity threshold conditional 

approach used in the standard tandem duplicate detection algorithm . A genes that are 

co -localized and are at most D genes away are merged as tandem duplicates. If a 

candidate duplicate is found to occupy a different chromosome and consist of a singl e

exon, the candidate duplicate is merged into the orthogroup as a retrogene granted if a

is composed of multiple exons. 

VIII . Segmental Duplication Detection 

To detect segmental duplicates, we leverage the computed synteny blocks. The idea is 

to find sets of gene neighborhoods, currently without ortholog assignments, that 

resemble an established syntenic set of orthologs. If we label the two organisms 

constituting the synteny blocks A and B, we iterate over all of A’s genes in the synteny 

block and collect non -syntenic A genes that meet the sequence similarity threshold 

condition with the syntenic ortholog found in B. The collected genes are organized by 

chromos ome and position, and a sliding window is used to find clusters of at least 3 

genes that are no further apart than S genes from one another. Genes found within 

these clusters are tagged as segmentally duplicated genes. This procedure is then 

repeated for organism B with A being the point of reference. Once all the synteny blocks 

for A and B have been processed, the pairwise segmental duplications are reported. 

Once all pairwise comparisons have reached completion, organism -specific segmental 

duplications are determined. For each organism, all tagged segmentally duplicated 

genes are re -organized by chromosome and position. A sliding window is then used to 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

generate blocks of segmental duplications where the distance between any two genes 

in the segmental duplication block is no greater than the synteny sliding window size. 

IX . Tree Cluster Inference 

Synolog is designed to identify synteny clusters that span across three or more 

organisms, which are termed tree clusters. The algorithm begins at the top (i.e., the tips) 

of the guide tree and initiates a syntenic ortholog search using synteny blocks betw een 

the current organism ( A) and the next organism ( B) down the guide tree. For each 

synteny block shared by A and B, each gene in B is queried for a syntenic ortholog 

found in C, where C is the next organism down the tree (i.e., the one sharing a most 

rec ent common ancestor) from B with a syntenic ortholog. If the tree clusters are to be 

constructed through a concurrent approach, the syntenic ortholog in C is required to be 

the syntenic ortholog with the current A ortholog. If the ortholog in C is validated, the C

ortholog is added to the cluster and then used to get the next syntenic ortholog down 

the guide tree. This procedure is continued until there are less than three organisms 

that can be used to venture down the guide tree. 

X. Post Inference Toolkit 

Synolog houses several utili ties that allow the results of an analysis to be parsed or 

visualized. For instance, o rthogroups containing a particular feature (e.g., orthogroups 

with local expansions for a specific species) can be readily extracted for evaluation 

using the synolog_info.py script . Visualizations can be generated from either a 

genome -wide, synteny block, regional, segmental duplication , or tree cluster 

perspective by invoking the synolog_plot.py subprogram. The synolog_fasta.py 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

utility can be used to generate FASTA files containing gene sequences for orthogroups 

with the flexibility of querying only one -to -one orthogroups or requesting genes be 

represented by the ir longest transcript. 

Synteny -Based Scaffolding 

The framework underpinning Synolog’s guided synteny scaffolding approach is 

designed to work in a pairwise fashion and is implemented in 

synolog_collinearize.py . The algorithm begins by a declaration of two genome 

assemblies: one to serve as a guide ( A) and the other to be scaffolded ( B). The 

conserved synteny blocks between two genome assemblies from running the Synolog 

pipeline in a prior analysis are then loaded (Fig . 6A). Contigs from B that contain 

regions of conserved synteny are bucketed , where each bucket represents the 

sequence in A that contained the most syntenic information for its corresponding 

assignees (Fig . 6B). Next, each synteny block is reduced to a pair of base pair positions 

that denote the midpoint positions of the synteny block in the respective sequences in A

and B.

To maximize the collinearity between the two genome assemblies, the sequences from 

A and B are projected onto two -dimensional space. Each sequence for A is assigned a 

fixed position while the contigs in B are repeatedly shuffled. To reduce the number of 

permutations, shuffling is performed within buckets and not between buckets. The initial 

permutation is constructed by ordering each sequence in B based on the average of 

adding each midpoint with respect to A. A linear regression is then compute d between 

th e chromosome in A and the contigs in B using the synteny midpoints , generating a R 2

value (Fig . 6C). Next, adjacent sequences in B are swapped and a new R 2 value is 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

calculated and compared with the current score (Fig . 6D). The ordering with higher R 2

score is retained as the current best and the analysis is repeated, with adjacent swaps 

performed and new orderings evaluated. If the score is worse than the current score, 

arrangements containing the offending swap are not pursued. The ordering with the 

highest R 2 value is retained and designated as the best ordering of contigs for B for the 

given sequence in A.

After all sequences in A have been assigned a best ordering of sequences from B, a 

genome -wide linear regression is then performed between A and B (Fig . 6E). The set of 

instructions describing how the arrangement of contigs from B should be scaffolded is 

generated based on this genome -wide ordering and outputted by 

synolog_collinearize.py . Along with the targeted genome assembly and the 

respective annotations, these series of steps can be executed by 

alter_genome_structure.py , which will to perform the scaffolding and annotation lift 

over (Fig . 6F). An overview of the synteny scaffolding process can be viewed in Figure 

6.

Figure 6: Outline of the synteny scaffolding algorithm. (A) The basis of synteny scaffolding algorithm begins with declaring a 

guide genome and a set of contigs to be scaffolded. (B) The contigs are bucketed to a guide sequence based on synteny 

content and then in itially ordered based on the syntenic genes. (C) A hill -climbing algorithm is implemented where for each 

guide sequence, collinearity is measured using a linear regression with the contigs. (D) Contigs are swapped with adjacent 

neighbors after each iterati on, with swaps that increase collinearity pursued. (E) After all guide sequences have a best fitted 

arrangement of contigs, a linear regression is performed using all guide sequences and the computed order of contigs. (F) 

This arrangement is then provided for users to use to scaffold the processed contigs. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Case Study 1: T estudine Evolution 

To test the performance of Synolog in testudines, we obtained the reference genomes 

for the green sea turtle (Wang et al. 2013) , the diamondback terrapin (Jiang et al. 2025) ,

the red -eared slide r (Simison et al. 2020) , the Aldabra giant tortoise (Çilingir et al. 2022) 

and the Mexican gopher tortoise (http://www.vertebrategenomesproject.org/ ). Specific 

versions for each assembly are listed in Table S4. Non -coding genes were extracted 

from each assembly using the synolog_ncgenes.py utility and added to the species 

cache . All pairwise BLASTP and BLASTN analyses were executed employing the 

synolog_blastctrl.py tool for protein -coding and non -coding gene datasets, 

respectively. To arrange these species from an evolutionary perspective, we used the 

phylogeny reported by Thomson et al. (2021 ) to serve as the guide tree . The species 

were processed through the Synolog pipeline using the default values of a synteny 

sliding window of 100 genes, tandem duplication sliding window of 50 genes, and a 

standard deviation of 0.5 for the sequence similarity threshold condition .

To obtain gene symbols for gene ontology diagnosis, Synolog was re -executed 

including the Goode’s thornscrub tortoise ( Gopherus evgoodei )

(http://www.vertebrategenomesproject.org/ ) and Chicken ( Gallus gallus )

(https://useast.ensembl.org/Gallus_gallus/Info/Index?db=core ) following pipeline 1 to 

obtain pairwise results . Genome versions for both assemblies can be found in Table S4.

Each of the orthogroups of interest were assigned a single gene symbol from either 

Goode’s thornscrub tortoise or Chicken if the genes in the orthogroup did not have a 

single gene symbol . biomaRt v2.64.0 (Durinck et al. 2005) was used to query t he gene 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

symbols to the G. evgoodei gene ontologies, which were reduced using the R package 

rrvgo v1.20.0 (Sayols 2023) by applying the “Rel” method. 

Case Study 2: Metazoan Evolution 

Echoing Simakov et al. (2022 ), the dataset consists of the genomes and annotations for 

Florida lancelet, the flame j ellyfish, the Yesso scallop, the freshwater sponge Ephydatia 

muelleri , and the freshwater polyp. Except for the freshwater sponge and the Yesso 

scallop , the following accessions were obtained from NCBI . The genome for the 

freshwater sponge (Kenny et al. 2020) was downloaded from EphyBase 

(https://spaces.facsci.ualberta.ca/ephybase/ ) while the Yesso scallop dataset (Wang et 

al. 2017) was obtained from the MolluscDB (Liu et al. 2021, 2025) . Specific genome 

accessions can be view in Table S 5. For consistency, we followed the phylogeny 

presented in Simakov et al. (2022 ) to describe the evolutionary relationships between the 

five species. 

The five species were processed through the Synolog pipeline similarly as with the first 

cast study with the exception of performing a more relaxed tandem duplication 

classification. Given the evolutionary distance amongst the samples, we ran Synolog 

and i ncreased the standard deviation for the sequence similarity threshold condition 

from 0.5 to 2.0. Visualizations were generated using synolog_ploy.py for all syntenic 

genes and for tree -spanning genes, Lastly, to implement a similar method to that 

conducted by Simakov et al. (2022), we took the reported tree clusters produced by 

Synolog and searched for ALGs by merging tree clusters based on the encompassing 

chromosomes while ignoring genes on unplaced contigs or tree clusters lacking a 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

member species. ALGs that only contained a single gene per species (i.e., did not 

contain any co -localized elements) were further excluded. 

Case Study 3: Synteny -Based Scaffolding 

We obtained in -house contig -level reference genome for the mackerel icefish and the 

Antarctic bald notothen. The gene annotations for these assemblies were lifted over to 

the contig -based assembly using the respective AGP files and a custom python script. 

Following, we processed these contig -level assemblies through the Synolog pipeline 

using default parameters with the Patagonia blennie chromosome -level reference 

genome (Cheng et al. 2023) . Evolutionary relationships were defined following the 

phylogeny predicted by Near et al. (2018). 

The pairwise synteny information found with E. maclovinus was fed to 

synolog_collinearize.py for each of the two focal species while specifying E. 

maclovinus as the guide . T he resulting organization , gene annotations, and contig -level 

reference genome was then processed by Synolog’s scaffolding submodule to generate 

a new annotated reference genome for both C. gunnari and T. borchgrevinki . The new 

assemblies were then added to the species cache and processed through the Synolog 

pipeline with the same E. maclovinus dataset . We then processed the two synteny -

scaffolded genome assemblies though the stats.sh module from the BB Tools suite 

(Bushnell 2014) to compare the assembly metrics to that presented in the publications. 

OrthoFinder2 Comparison 

OrthoFinder2 is designed to work on protein sequences where a single isoform is used 

to represent each protein -coding gene. For case studies one and two , the longest 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

transcript was selected for each gene using a custom python script. The filtered 

proteome was then processed through OrthoFinder2 v2.5.4 using default parameters. 

The resulting Phylogenetic Hierarchical Orthogroups (PHOs) were then compared to the 

orthogro ups inferred by Synolog using a custom python script. Briefly, the orthogroups 

generated from Synolog are checked to determine if A) they are equivalent to any PHO, 

B) are a subset of a PHO, C) are a superset of a PHO, D) contain members in separate 

PHOs, or if they E) contain members not part of a PHO. 

Code Availability 

Synolog (v1.0) is released under the free software, GPLv3 license. Source code can be 

downloaded from the Catchen lab website (http://catchenlab.life.illinois.edu/synolog/ )

and is made available in a public Git repository 

(https://bitbucket.org/jcatchen/synolog/src/master/ ). All datasets used in this study are 

publicly available in their respective studies. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank Malavika Venu, Angel G. Rivera -Colón for their helpful 

feedback when writing the manuscript, Katie Karl for her valuable advice regarding turtle 

biology, and Tatum Bernat and Andrew Whitehead for their input when testing the 

synteny -based scaffolding algorithm. 

References 

Aganezov S, Alekseyev MA. 2016. Multi -genome Scaffold Co -assembly Based on the 

Analysis of Gene Orders and Genomic Repeats. In Bioinformatics Research and 

Applications (eds. A. Bourgeois, P. Skums, X. Wan, and A. Zelikovsky), pp. 237 –

249, Springer International Publishing, Cham. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Aganezov S, Sitdykova N, Alekseyev MA. 2015. Scaffold assembly based on genome 

rearrangement analysis. Computational Biology and Chemistry 57 : 46 –53. 

Alam MNU, Román -Palacios C, Copetti D, Wing RA. 2025. Universal orthologs infer 

deep phylogenies and improve genome quality assessments. BMC Biol 23 : 224. 

Altenhoff AM, Train C -M, Gilbert KJ, Mediratta I, Mendes de Farias T, Moi D, Nevers Y, 

Radoykova H -S, Rossier V, Warwick Vesztrocy A, et al. 2021. OMA orthology in 

2021: website overhaul, conserved isoforms, ancestral gene order and more. 

Nucleic Acids Res 49 : D373 –D379. 

Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ. 1990. Basic local alignment 

search tool. Journal of Molecular Biology 215 : 403 –410. 

Anselmetti Y, Duchemin W, Tannier E, Chauve C, Bérard S. 2018. Phylogenetic signal 

from rearrangements in 18 Anopheles species by joint scaffolding extant and 

ancestral genomes. BMC Genomics 19 : 96. 

Arantes LS, Brown T, De Panis D, Whiting SD, Young EJ, LaCasella EL, Carvajal GA, 

Kennedy A, Edmunds D, Bentley BP, et al. 2025. Haplotype -resolved reference 

genomes of the sea turtle clade unveil ultra -syntenic genomes with hotspots of 

divergence. Gigascience 14 : giaf105. 

Bailey JA, Yavor AM, Massa HF, Trask BJ, Eichler EE. 2001. Segmental Duplications: 

Organization and Impact Within the Current Human Genome Project Assembly. 

Genome Res 11 : 1005 –1017. 

Balaban M, Moshiri N, Mai U, Jia X, Mirarab S. 2019. TreeCluster: Clustering biological 

sequences using phylogenetic trees. PLOS ONE 14 : e0221068. 

Bao E, Jiang T, Girke T. 2014. AlignGraph: algorithm for secondary de novo genome 

assembly guided by closely related references. Bioinformatics 30 : i319 –i328. 

Bista I, Wood JMD, Desvignes T, McCarthy SA, Matschiner M, Ning Z, Tracey A, 

Torrance J, Sims Y, Chow W, et al. 2023. Genomics of cold adaptations in the 

Antarctic notothenioid fish radiation. Nat Commun 14 : 3412. 

Brosius J. 1991. Retroposons —Seeds of Evolution. Science 251 : 753 –753. 

Bushnell B. 2014. BBTools software package. e.

Bussotti G, Notredame C, Enright AJ. 2013. Detecting and Comparing Non -Coding 

RNAs in the High -Throughput Era. Int J Mol Sci 14 : 15423 –15458. 

Cannon SB, Mitra A, Baumgarten A, Young ND, May G. 2004. The roles of segmental 

and tandem gene duplication in the evolution of large gene families in 

Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Plant Biol 4: 10. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Carelli FN, Hayakawa T, Go Y, Imai H, Warnefors M, Kaessmann H. 2016. The life 

history of retrocopies illuminates the evolution of new mammalian genes. 

Genome Res 26 : 301 –314. 

Catchen JM, Conery JS, Postlethwait JH. 2009. Automated identification of conserved 

synteny after whole -genome duplication. Genome Res 19 : 1497 –1505. 

Chebii VJ, Mpolya EA, Oyola SO, Kotze A, Entfellner J -BD, Mutuku JM. 2021. Genome 

Scan for Variable Genes Involved in Environmental Adaptations of Nubian Ibex. J

Mol Evol 89 : 448 –457. 

Chen H, Xie Z, Chen M, Zhu P, Chen D, Huang Y, Dai S. 2025. Targeting eIF4A with 

RNA Aptamers Enhances Salt Stress Tolerance in Rice Through Modulation of 

Translation Initiation. Rice (N Y) 18 : 62. 

Cheng C -HC, Rivera -Colón AG, Minhas BF, Wilson L, Rayamajhi N, Vargas -Chacoff L, 

Catchen JM. 2023. Chromosome -Level Genome Assembly and Circadian Gene 

Repertoire of the Patagonia Blennie Eleginops maclovinus —The Closest 

Ancestral Proxy of Antarctic Cryonot othenioids. Genes 14 : 1196. 

Çilingir FG, A’Bear L, Hansen D, Davis LR, Bunbury N, Ozgul A, Croll D, Grossen C. 

2022. Chromosome -level genome assembly for the Aldabra giant tortoise 

enables insights into the genetic health of a threatened population. GigaScience 

11 : giac090. 

Cusack BP, Wolfe KH. 2007. Not Born Equal: Increased Rate Asymmetry in Relocated 

and Retrotransposed Rodent Gene Duplicates. Mol Biol Evol 24 : 679 –686. 

Dai H, Yoshimatsu TF, Long M. 2006. Retrogene movement within - and between -

chromosomes in the evolution of Drosophila genomes. Gene 385 : 96 –102. 

Dallery J -F, Lapalu N, Zampounis A, Pigné S, Luyten I, Amselem J, Wittenberg AHJ, 

Zhou S, de Queiroz MV, Robin GP, et al. 2017. Gapless genome assembly of 

Colletotrichum higginsianum reveals chromosome structure and association of 

transposable elements wit h secondary metabolite gene clusters. BMC Genomics 

18 : 667. 

Dalquen DA, Altenhoff AM, Gonnet GH, Dessimoz C. 2013. The Impact of Gene 

Duplication, Insertion, Deletion, Lateral Gene Transfer and Sequencing Error on 

Orthology Inference: A Simulation Study. PLOS ONE 8: e56925. 

Durinck S, Moreau Y, Kasprzyk A, Davis S, De Moor B, Brazma A, Huber W. 2005. 

BioMart and Bioconductor: a powerful link between biological databases and 

microarray data analysis. Bioinformatics 21 : 3439 –3440. 

Emms DM, Kelly S. 2019. OrthoFinder: phylogenetic orthology inference for 

comparative genomics. Genome Biol 20 : 238. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Emms DM, Kelly S. 2015. OrthoFinder: solving fundamental biases in whole genome 

comparisons dramatically improves orthogroup inference accuracy. Genome Biol 

16 : 157. 

Ernst CH, Altenburg RGM, Barbour RW. 1998. Turtles of the world. World Biodiversity 

Database CD -ROM Series .

https://www.waterbouwkundiglaboratorium.be/nl/catalogus (Accessed November 

27, 2025). 

Flagel LE, Wendel JF. 2009. Gene duplication and evolutionary novelty in plants. New 

Phytologist 183 : 557 –564. 

Force A, Lynch M, Pickett FB, Amores A, Yan Y, Postlethwait J. 1999. Preservation of 

Duplicate Genes by Complementary, Degenerative Mutations. Genetics 151 :

1531 –1545. 

Fu P, Cai Z, You R, Deng L, Li Z, Miao Z, Peng Y. 2025. Systematic identification and 

characterization of virus lncRNAs suggests extensive structural mimicry of host 

lncRNAs. Brief Bioinform 26 : bbaf640. 

Haas BJ, Delcher AL, Wortman JR, Salzberg SL. 2004. DAGchainer: a tool for mining 

segmental genome duplications and synteny. Bioinformatics 20 : 3643 –3646. 

Hamilton B, Dong Y, Shindo M, Liu W, Odell I, Ruvkun G, Lee SS. 2005. A systematic 

RNAi screen for longevity genes in C. elegans. Genes Dev 19 : 1544 –1555. 

Hanke DM, Dagan T. 2025. SegMantX: A Novel Tool for Detecting DNA Duplications 

Uncovers Prevalent Duplications in Plasmids. Mol Biol Evol 42 : msaf242. 

Harduin -Lepers A, Petit D, Mollicone R, Delannoy P, Petit J -M, Oriol R. 2008. 

Evolutionary history of the alpha2,8 -sialyltransferase (ST8Sia) gene family: 

Tandem duplications in early deuterostomes explain most of the diversity found 

in the vertebrate ST8S ia genes. BMC Evol Biol 8: 258. 

Hezroni H, Koppstein D, Schwartz MG, Avrutin A, Bartel DP, Ulitsky I. 2015. Principles 

of Long Noncoding RNA Evolution Derived from Direct Comparison of 

Transcriptomes in 17 Species. Cell Reports 11 : 1110 –1122. 

Hu C, Jiao Z, Deng X, Tu X, Lu A, Xie C, Jiang K, Zeng X, Liu Z -J, Huang W, et al. 

2022. The ecological adaptation of the unparalleled plastome character evolution 

in slipper orchids. Front Plant Sci 13 . https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/plant -

science/articles/10.3389/fpls.2022.1075098/full (Accessed December 7, 2025). 

Jiang H, Wang Z, Zhai X, Ma G, Wang T, Kong F, Luo W, Yu Z, Li H, Ren Y, et al. 

2025. Chromosome -level genome of diamondback terrapin provides insight into 

the genetic basis of salinity adaptation. Integrative Zoology 20 : 1227 –1245. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Jiang Y, Tang Y, Hoover C, Kondo Y, Huang D, Restagno D, Shao B, Gao L, Michael 

McDaniel J, Zhou M, et al. 2021. Kupffer cell receptor CLEC4F is important for 

the destruction of desialylated platelets in mice. Cell Death Differ 28 : 3009 –3021. 

Jin Y, An X, Ye Z, Cully B, Wu J, Li J. 2009. RGS5, a Hypoxia -inducible Apoptotic 

Stimulator in Endothelial Cells *. Journal of Biological Chemistry 284 : 23436 –

23443. 

Kenny NJ, Francis WR, Rivera -Vicéns RE, Juravel K, de Mendoza A, Díez -Vives C, 

Lister R, Bezares -Calderón LA, Grombacher L, Roller M, et al. 2020. Tracing 

animal genomic evolution with the chromosomal -level assembly of the freshwater 

sponge Ephydatia muell eri. Nat Commun 11 : 3676. 

Kern C, Wang Y, Chitwood J, Korf I, Delany M, Cheng H, Medrano JF, Van Eenennaam 

AL, Ernst C, Ross P, et al. 2018. Genome -wide identification of tissue -specific 

long non -coding RNA in three farm animal species. BMC Genomics 19 : 684. 

Kim Y -K, Cheon S -H, Hong J -R, Kim K -J. 2023. Evolutionary Patterns of the Chloroplast 

Genome in Vanilloid Orchids (Vanilloideae, Orchidaceae). Int J Mol Sci 24 : 3808. 

Kim Y -K, Jo S, Cheon S -H, Joo M -J, Hong J -R, Kwak M, Kim K -J. 2020. Plastome 

Evolution and Phylogeny of Orchidaceae, With 24 New Sequences. Front Plant 

Sci 11 . https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/plant -

science/articles/10.3389/fpls.2020.00022/full (Accessed December 7, 2025). 

Kloss -Brandstätter A, Pacher D, Schönherr S, Weissensteiner H, Binna R, Specht G, 

Kronenberg F. 2011. HaploGrep: a fast and reliable algorithm for automatic 

classification of mitochondrial DNA haplogroups. Human Mutation 32 : 25 –32. 

Komoroske LM, Jeffries KM, Connon RE, Dexter J, Hasenbein M, Verhille C, Fangue 

NA. 2016. Sublethal salinity stress contributes to habitat limitation in an 

endangered estuarine fish. Evolutionary Applications 9: 963 –981. 

Kono TJY, Brohammer AB, McGaugh SE, Hirsch CN. 2018. Tandem Duplicate Genes 

in Maize Are Abundant and Date to Two Distinct Periods of Time. G3 

Genes|Genomes|Genetics 8: 3049 –3058. 

Koski LB, Golding GB. 2001. The Closest BLAST Hit Is Often Not the Nearest Neighbor. 

J Mol Evol 52 : 540 –542. 

Lai Y, Du S, Li H, Zheng Y, Ardila -Camacho A, Aspöck U, Aspöck H, Yang D, Zhang F, 

Liu X. 2025. Lacewing -specific Universal Single Copy Orthologs designed 

towards resolution of backbone phylogeny of Neuropterida. Systematic 

Entomology 50 : 309 –324. 

Lee H, Zhang Z, Krause HM. 2019. Long Noncoding RNAs and Repetitive Elements: 

Junk or Intimate Evolutionary Partners? Trends in Genetics 35 : 892 –902. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Lemos SMC, Fonçatti LFC, Guyot R, Paschoal AR, Domingues DS. 2020. Genome -

Wide Screening and Characterization of Non -Coding RNAs in Coffea canephora. 

Non -Coding RNA 6: 39. 

Leprêtre M, Hamar J, Urias MB, Kültz D. 2025. Comparative Proteomics of Salinity 

Stress Responses in Fish and Aquatic Invertebrates. Proteomics 25 : 185 –205. 

Li Y, Gao L, Pan Y, Tian M, Li Y, He C, Dong Y, Sun Y, Zhou Z. 2020. Chromosome -

level reference genome of the jellyfish Rhopilema esculentum. Gigascience 9:

giaa036. 

Li Z, Zhai X, Zhang L, Yang Y, Zhu H, Lü H, Xiong E, Chu S, Zhang X, Zhang D, et al. 

2024. Genome -Wide Identification of the Whirly Gene Family and Its Potential 

Function in Low Phosphate Stress in Soybean (Glycine max). Genes 15 : 833. 

Liu D, Hunt M, Tsai IJ. 2018. Inferring synteny between genome assemblies: a 

systematic evaluation. BMC Bioinformatics 19 : 26. 

Liu F, Cai B, Lian S, Chang X, Chen D, Pu Z, Bao L, Wang J, Lv J, Zheng H, et al. 

2025. MolluscDB 2.0: a comprehensive functional and evolutionary genomics 

database for over 1400 molluscan species. Nucleic Acids Res 53 : D1075 –

D1086. 

Liu F, Li Y, Yu H, Zhang L, Hu J, Bao Z, Wang S. 2021. MolluscDB: an integrated 

functional and evolutionary genomics database for the hyper -diverse animal 

phylum Mollusca. Nucleic Acids Res 49 : D988 –D997. 

Ludwig J, Mrázek J. 2024. OrthoRefine: automated enhancement of prior ortholog 

identification via synteny. BMC Bioinformatics 25 : 163. 

Madrigal G, Minhas BF, Catchen J. 2025. Klumpy: A tool to evaluate the integrity of 

long -read genome assemblies and illusive sequence motifs. Molecular Ecology 

Resources 25 : e13982. 

Marques DA, Jones FC, Di Palma F, Kingsley DM, Reimchen TE. 2022. Genomic 

changes underlying repeated niche shifts in an adaptive radiation. Evolution 76 :

1301 –1319. 

Marques -Bonet T, Girirajan S, Eichler EE. 2009. The origins and impact of primate 

segmental duplications. Trends in Genetics 25 : 443 –454. 

Martinez Gomez L, Pozo F, Walsh TA, Abascal F, Tress ML. 2021. The clinical 

importance of tandem exon duplication -derived substitutions. Nucleic Acids Res 

49 : 8232 –8246. 

Mattick JS, Amaral PP, Carninci P, Carpenter S, Chang HY, Chen L -L, Chen R, Dean 

C, Dinger ME, Fitzgerald KA, et al. 2023. Long non -coding RNAs: definitions, 

functions, challenges and recommendations. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 24 : 430 –447. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Melchionna M, Castiglione S, Girardi G, Serio C, Esposito A, Mondanaro A, Profico A, 

Sansalone G, Raia P. 2024. RRmorph —a new R package to map phenotypic 

evolutionary rates and patterns on 3D meshes. Commun Biol 7: 1009. 

Mighell AJ, Smith NR, Robinson PA, Markham AF. 2000. Vertebrate pseudogenes. 

FEBS Letters 468 : 109 –114. 

Misra S, Wu Y, Venkataraman G, Sopory SK, Tuteja N. 2007. Heterotrimeric G -protein 

complex and G -protein -coupled receptor from a legume (Pisum sativum): role in 

salinity and heat stress and cross -talk with phospholipase C. Plant J 51 : 656 –

669. 

Misteli T. 2007. Beyond the Sequence: Cellular Organization of Genome Function. Cell 

128 : 787 –800. 

Near TJ, MacGuigan DJ, Parker E, Struthers CD, Jones CD, Dornburg A. 2018. 

Phylogenetic analysis of Antarctic notothenioids illuminates the utility of RADseq 

for resolving Cenozoic adaptive radiations. Molecular Phylogenetics and 

Evolution 129 : 268 –279. 

Nehrt NL, Clark WT, Radivojac P, Hahn MW. 2011. Testing the Ortholog Conjecture 

with Comparative Functional Genomic Data from Mammals. PLOS 

Computational Biology 7: e1002073. 

Noviello TMR, Di Liddo A, Ventola GM, Spagnuolo A, D’Aniello S, Ceccarelli M, Cerulo 

L. 2018. Detection of long non –coding RNA homology, a comparative study on 

alignment and alignment –free metrics. BMC Bioinformatics 19 : 407. 

Numanagić I, Gökkaya AS, Zhang L, Berger B, Alkan C, Hach F. 2018a. Fast 

characterization of segmental duplications in genome assemblies. Bioinformatics 

34 : i706 –i714. 

Numanagić I, Gökkaya AS, Zhang L, Berger B, Alkan C, Hach F. 2018b. Fast 

characterization of segmental duplications in genome assemblies. Bioinformatics 

34 : i706 –i714. 

Olsen L, Thum E, Rohner N. 2021. Lipid metabolism in adaptation to extreme nutritional 

challenges. Developmental Cell 56 : 1417 –1429. 

Parey E, Louis A, Cabau C, Guiguen Y, Roest Crollius H, Berthelot C. 2020. Synteny -

Guided Resolution of Gene Trees Clarifies the Functional Impact of Whole -

Genome Duplications. Molecular Biology and Evolution 37 : 3324 –3337. 

Pegueroles C, Iraola -Guzmán S, Chorostecki U, Ksiezopolska E, Saus E, Gabaldón T. 

2019. Transcriptomic analyses reveal groups of co -expressed, syntenic lncRNAs 

in four species of the genus Caenorhabditis. RNA Biology 16 : 320 –329. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Perez M, Hurm K, Liberles DA. 2025. Understanding Functional Evolution in Orthologs 

and Paralogs. J Mol Evol . https://doi.org/10.1007/s00239 -025 -10274 -4

(Accessed November 23, 2025). 

Peterson ME, Chen F, Saven JG, Roos DS, Babbitt PC, Sali A. 2009. Evolutionary 

constraints on structural similarity in orthologs and paralogs. Protein Sci 18 :

1306 –1315. 

Quesada V, Freitas -Rodríguez S, Miller J, Pérez -Silva JG, Jiang Z -F, Tapia W, 

Santiago -Fernández O, Campos -Iglesias D, Kuderna LFK, Quinzin M, et al. 

2019. Giant tortoise genomes provide insights into longevity and age -related 

disease. Nat Ecol Evol 3: 87 –95. 

Rayamajhi N, Rivera -Colón AG, Minhas BF, Cheng CHC, Catchen JM. 2025. The 

genome of the cryopelagic Antarctic bald notothen, Trematomus borchgrevinki. 

G3 Genes|Genomes|Genetics 15 : jkae267. 

Rivera -Colón AG, Rayamajhi N, Minhas BF, Madrigal G, Bilyk KT, Yoon V, Hüne M, 

Gregory S, Cheng CHC, Catchen JM. 2023. Genomics of Secondarily Temperate 

Adaptation in the Only Non -Antarctic Icefish. Molecular Biology and Evolution 40 :

msad029. 

Roosaare M, Vaher M, Kaplinski L, Möls M, Andreson R, Lepamets M, Kõressaar T, 

Naaber P, Kõljalg S, Remm M. 2017. StrainSeeker: fast identification of bacterial 

strains from raw sequencing reads using user -provided guide trees. PeerJ 5:

e3353. 

Rost B. 1999. Twilight zone of protein sequence alignments. Protein Engineering 12 :

85 –94. 

Rowley MJ, Corces VG. 2018. Organizational principles of 3D genome architecture. Nat 

Rev Genet 19 : 789 –800. 

Sayols S. 2023. rrvgo: a Bioconductor package for interpreting lists of Gene Ontology 

terms. MicroPubl Biol 2023 : 10.17912/micropub.biology.000811. 

Schelle L, Abrantes J, Baldauf H -M, Esteves PJ. 2023. Evolution of primate interferon -

induced transmembrane proteins (IFITMs): a story of gain and loss with a 

differentiation into a canonical cluster and IFITM retrogenes. Front Microbiol 14 :

1213685. 

Shaffer BH, Minx P, Warren DE, Shedlock AM, Thomson RC, Valenzuela N, Abramyan 

J, Amemiya CT, Badenhorst D, Biggar KK, et al. 2013. The western painted turtle 

genome, a model for the evolution of extreme physiological adaptations in a 

slowly evolving linea ge. Genome Biology 14 : R28. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Simakov O, Bredeson J, Berkoff K, Marletaz F, Mitros T, Schultz DT, O’Connell BL, 

Dear P, Martinez DE, Steele RE, et al. 2022. Deeply conserved synteny and the 

evolution of metazoan chromosomes. Science Advances 8: eabi5884. 

Simakov O, Marlétaz F, Yue J -X, O’Connell B, Jenkins J, Brandt A, Calef R, Tung C -H, 

Huang T -K, Schmutz J, et al. 2020. Deeply conserved synteny resolves early 

events in vertebrate evolution. Nat Ecol Evol 4: 820 –830. 

Simison WB, Parham JF, Papenfuss TJ, Lam AW, Henderson JB. 2020. An Annotated 

Chromosome -Level Reference Genome of the Red -Eared Slider Turtle 

(Trachemys scripta elegans). Genome Biology and Evolution 12 : 456 –462. 

Small CM, Bassham S, Catchen J, Amores A, Fuiten AM, Brown RS, Jones AG, Cresko 

WA. 2016. The genome of the Gulf pipefish enables understanding of 

evolutionary innovations. Genome Biol 17 : 258. 

Studer RA, Robinson -Rechavi M. 2009. How confident can we be that orthologs are 

similar, but paralogs differ? Trends in Genetics 25 : 210 –216. 

Tamazian G, Dobrynin P, Krasheninnikova K, Komissarov A, Koepfli K -P, O’Brien SJ. 

2016. Chromosomer: a reference -based genome arrangement tool for producing 

draft chromosome sequences. Gigascience 5: s13742 -016 -0141 –6. 

Tang Z, Wu Y, Yang Y, Yang Y -CT, Wang Z, Yuan J, Yang Y, Hua C, Fan X, Niu G, et 

al. 2017. Comprehensive analysis of long non -coding RNAs highlights their 

spatio -temporal expression patterns and evolutional conservation in Sus scrofa. 

Sci Rep 7: 43166. 

Thomson RC, Spinks PQ, Shaffer HB. 2021. A global phylogeny of turtles reveals a 

burst of climate -associated diversification on continental margins. Proceedings of 

the National Academy of Sciences 118 : e2012215118. 

Vanin EF. 1985. PROCESSED PSEUDOGENES: CHARACTERISTICS AND 

EVOLUTION. Annual Review of Genetics 19 : 253 –272. 

Vollger MR, Guitart X, Dishuck PC, Mercuri L, Harvey WT, Gershman A, Diekhans M, 

Sulovari A, Munson KM, Lewis AP, et al. 2022. Segmental duplications and their 

variation in a complete human genome. Science 376 : eabj6965. 

Walden N, Schranz ME. 2023. Synteny Identifies Reliable Orthologs for Phylogenomics 

and Comparative Genomics of the Brassicaceae. Genome Biol Evol 15 :

evad034. 

Wallberg A, Bunikis I, Pettersson OV, Mosbech M -B, Childers AK, Evans JD, Mikheyev 

AS, Robertson HM, Robinson GE, Webster MT. 2019. A hybrid de novo genome 

assembly of the honeybee, Apis mellifera, with chromosome -length scaffolds. 

BMC Genomics 20 : 275. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Wang S, Zhang J, Jiao W, Li J, Xun X, Sun Y, Guo X, Huan P, Dong B, Zhang L, et al. 

2017. Scallop genome provides insights into evolution of bilaterian karyotype and 

development. Nat Ecol Evol 1: 0120. 

Wang Y, Tang H, DeBarry JD, Tan X, Li J, Wang X, Lee T, Jin H, Marler B, Guo H, et 

al. 2012. MCScanX: a toolkit for detection and evolutionary analysis of gene 

synteny and collinearity. Nucleic Acids Research 40 : e49. 

Wang Z, Pascual -Anaya J, Zadissa A, Li W, Niimura Y, Huang Z, Li C, White S, Xiong 

Z, Fang D, et al. 2013. The draft genomes of soft -shell turtle and green sea turtle 

yield insights into the development and evolution of the turtle -specific body plan. 

Nat Genet 45 : 701 –706. 

Watanabe T, Kure A, Horiike T. 2023. OrthoPhy: A Program to Construct Ortholog Data 

Sets Using Taxonomic Information. Genome Biol Evol 15 : evad026. 

Waterhouse RM, Aganezov S, Anselmetti Y, Lee J, Ruzzante L, Reijnders MJMF, Feron 

R, Bérard S, George P, Hahn MW, et al. 2020. Evolutionary superscaffolding and 

chromosome anchoring to improve Anopheles genome assemblies. BMC Biol 18 :

1. 

Weiner AM, Deininger PL, Efstratiadis A. 1986. NONVIRAL RETROPOSONS: GENES, 

PSEUDOGENES, AND TRANSPOSABLE ELEMENTS GENERATED BY THE 

REVERSE FLOW OF GENETIC INFORMATION. Annual Review of Biochemistry 

55 : 631 –661. 

Widdison S, Coffey TJ. 2011. Cattle and chemokines: evidence for species -specific 

evolution of the bovine chemokine system. Animal Genetics 42 : 341 –353. 

Yang C -Y, Chen J -B, Tsai T -F, Tsai Y -C, Tsai C -Y, Liang P -H, Hsu T -L, Wu C -Y, Netea 

MG, Wong C -H, et al. 2013. CLEC4F Is an Inducible C -Type Lectin in F4/80 -

Positive Cells and Is Involved in Alpha -Galactosylceramide Presentation in Liver. 

PLOS ONE 8: e65070. 

Ye F, Lan X, Zhu W, You P. 2016. Mitochondrial genomes of praying mantises 

(Dictyoptera, Mantodea): rearrangement, duplication, and reassignment of tRNA 

genes. Sci Rep 6: 25634. 

Yin Z, Zhu M, Davidson EH, Bottjer DJ, Zhao F, Tafforeau P. 2015. Sponge grade body 

fossil with cellular resolution dating 60 Myr before the Cambrian. Proceedings of 

the National Academy of Sciences 112 : E1453 –E1460. 

Yu C, Hodapp D, Moog S, Dupont S, Darrouzet E, Keller Valsecchi CI, Colgan TJ, Pan 

Q, Darras H. 2026. Deep evolutionary conservation of a sex -determining locus 

without sequence homology. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

123 : e2522417123. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.07.717040 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Zeng L, Zhang N, Zhang Q, Endress PK, Huang J, Ma H. 2017. Resolution of deep 

eudicot phylogeny and their temporal diversification using nuclear genes from 

transcriptomic and genomic datasets. New Phytologist 214 : 1338 –1354. 

Zhang R -G, Shang H -Y, Milne RI, Almeida -Silva F, Chen H, Zhou M -J, Shu H, Jia K -H, 

Van de Peer Y, Ma Y -P. 2025. SOI: robust identification of orthologous synteny 

with the Orthology Index and broad applications in evolutionary genomics. 

Nucleic Acids Res 53 : gkaf320. 

Zhang Z -B, Xiong T, Wang X -J, Chen Y -R, Wang J -L, Guo C -L, Ye Z -Y. 2024. Lineage -

specific gene duplication and expansion of DUF1216 gene family in 

Brassicaceae. PLOS ONE 19 : e0302292. 

Zhou H, Clark E, Guan D, Lagarrigue S, Fang L, Cheng H, Tuggle CK, Kapoor M, Wang 

Y, Giuffra E, et al. 2025. Comparative Genomics and Epigenomics of 

Transcriptional Regulation. Annual Review of Animal Biosciences 13 : 73 –98.