Title: NOHIC: A PIPELINE FOR PLANT CONTIG SCAFFOLDING USING PERSONALIZED REFERENCES FROM PANGENOME GRAPHS

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
1

NOHIC: A PIPELINE FOR PLANT CONTIG SCAFFOLDING USING PERSONALIZED 

REFERENCES FROM PANGENOME GRAPHS 

AUTHORS 

An Nguyen -Hoang 1, *, Kübra Arslan 1, Venkataramana Kopalli 1, Steffen Windpassinger 3,

Dragan Perovic 4, Andreas Stahl 4, and Agnieszka Golicz 1,2 ,*

> 1

Department of Agrobioinformatics, IFZ Research Center for Biosystems, Land Use and 

Nutrition, Justus Liebig University, Heinrich Buff Ring 26 -32, Giessen, Hessen, 35392, 

Germany  

> 2

Plant Breeding, Wageningen University & Research, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708PB, 

Wageningen, The Netherland s

> 3

Department of Plant Breeding, IFZ Research Center for Biosystems, Land Use and Nutrition, 

Justus Liebig University, Heinrich Buff Ring 26 -32, Giessen, Hessen, 35392, Germany 

> 4

Institute for Resistance Research and Stress Tolerance, Julius Kühn Institute (JKI), 

Quedlinburg , Saxony -Anhalt , 37738, Germany 

* To whom correspondence should be addressed . E mail : agnieszka.golicz@wur.nl 

* Correspondence may also be addressed to. Email:  anhn3108972@gmail.com 

GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT 

ABSTRACT 

Hi -C data is commonly used for reference -free de novo scaffolding . However, with the rapid 

increase in high -quality reference genomes, reference -guided workflows are now more 

practical for assembling large numbers of target genomes without relying on costly and 

labor -intensive Hi -C sequencing . Recently, a pangenome graph -based haplotype sampling 

algorithm was introduced to generate personalized graphs for target genomes. Such graphs 

have strong potential as references for reference -guided contig scaffolding . Here, we present 

noHiC, a reference -guided scaffolding pipeline support ing key steps of plant contig 

scaffolding . A distinctive feature of noHiC is the nohic -refpick script , generat ing a best -fit 

synthetic reference (synref) from a pangenome graph that is genetically close to the target 

contigs. This enables the integration of genetic information from many references (up to 48 

in our tests) without using them separately during scaffolding. Synrefs showed advantages 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

over highly contiguous conventional references in reducing false contig breaking during 

reference -based correction. Additionally, nohic -refpick can be combined with fast scaffolders 

(ntJoin ) to rapidly produce highly contiguous assemblies using synrefs derived from 

pangenome graphs.  The noHiC pipeline, used alone or in combination with ntJoin, can 

generally produce assemblies that are structurally consistent with public Hi -C-based or 

manually curated genomes . The pipeline is publicly available at 

https://github.com/andyngh/noHiC .

INTRODUCTION 

Despite challenges arising from the characteristics of plant genomes, including wide 

variation in genome size, ploidy level, heterozygosity, and high repeat content, the quality of 

plant genome assemblies has improved substantially in recent years  (1, 2) . Genome assembly 

workflows that integrate PacBio HiFi, Oxford Nanopore ultra -long (ONT UL), and Hi -C

sequencing data are now capable of producing telomere -to -telomere (T2T) or near -T2T 

assemblies  (3) . These advances have provided plant genomics with high -quality genomes, 

including gapless T2T assemblies, enabling the construction of pangenome graphs that 

incorporate genetic information from numerous genome assemblies and thereby improving 

the understanding of genetic architectures  (4) . For example, complete T2T genomes for 

sorghum, lettuce, Medicago , and Lablab purpureus have recently been assembled using 

combinations of PacBio HiFi, ONT UL, and Hi -C sequencing technologies  (5 –8) .

However, Hi -C-based reference -free scaffolding requires high sequencing depth, which is 

both costly and computationally intensive  (9 –12) . In addition, Hi -C library preparation 

involves complex and time -consuming protocols that might require specific optimizations for 

a species of interest  (10, 13, 14) . In contrast, reference -guided genome scaffolding 

workflows, which use alignments between target and reference genomes to order and orient 

contigs  (15) , offer an effective means to reduce sequencing costs  (12)  and thereby support 

projects involving the assembly of tens to hundreds of target genomes. This approach has 

become increasingly practical given the rapid growth in both the number and quality of 

published plant genomes  (1) .

Reference -guided g enome scaffolding can be subject to reference bias, where results are 

distorted at atypical (for example , highly divergent) positions on a reference genome (16) . In 

particular, reference bias can negatively impact sequence alignment, as reads or sequences 

from diverse regions may be poorly mapped or fail to be mapped to a single reference 

genome (16, 17) . Because most reference -guided assembly tools require alignment of target 

contigs to a reference genome (12, 18 –20) , divergent regions in the target genome may fail 

to be reconstructed during reference -guided assembly and may be absent from the final 

assembly, resulting in reduced representation of genetic diversity  (15, 21 –23) . In addition, 

errors present in reference genomes can propagate to the target assemblies and result in 

misassemblies  (15, 24) . To address th ese issue s, several tools have been developed for multi -

reference scaffolding, including Ragout2, ntJoin, and Multi -CSAR (20, 25, 26) . However, the 

algorithms implemented in these tools do not yet support efficient scaffolding with a high 

number of references (e.g., >10) or their repeated use. In particular, Ragout2 (for large 

genomes) requires a HAL/MAF (Hierarchical Alignment/Multiple A lignment Format) file 

produced by Cactus (27) , which contains alignments between the target genome and the 

references. Consequently, users must undergo the complex process of updating the HAL 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

file’s tree structure whenever new assemblies become available 

(https://github.com/ComparativeGenomicsToolkit/cactus/blob/master/doc/updating -

alignments.md ). Multi -CSAR constructs multiple separate single -reference draft assemblies 

for the target genome before generating a single multi -reference assembly (25) , which is not 

time -efficient when many references are used. ntJoin relies on user -specified weights for 

each reference (26)  (https://github.com/bcgsc/ntJoin ), which must be re -optimized whenever 

a new assembly is required. 

A pangenome represents the entirety of DNA sequences in a species, including both coding 

and non -coding regions (17, 28) . Comparisons of individual genomes from the same species 

typically reveal a large number of variants, ranging from single -nucleotide polymorphisms 

(SNPs) to large structural variants (SVs) that can result in the absence of entire genes in an 

individual (28, 29) . Thus, pangenomes provide an effective framework for compiling genetic 

variation from multiple genomes to address reference bias. 

The haplotype sampling algorithm for pangenome graphs proposed by Sirén et al. has the 

potential to improve multi -reference -guided scaffolding . Given a pangenome graph, the 

algorithm can recombine haplotypes to create a personalized graph for a target genome by 

using graph -unique k -mers (i.e., k -mers occurring once in the graph) present in the target’s 

sequencing reads (30) . Consequently, recombined DNA sequences originating from different 

haplotypes can be extracted and used as a single reference for scaffolding, without directly 

relying on multiple references. The limitations of current multi -reference scaffolders can 

ther efore be addressed, as pangenome graphs can be reused to generate a single synthetic 

reference for new target assemblies without requiring multiple whole -genome alignments or 

reference weight optimization. However, no attempt has been made to apply pangeno me 

graph -based haplotype sampling to reference -guided contig scaffolding to date. 

Pangenome graphs have been generated for  over 20  major crop species or genera, including 

cereals, legumes, vegetables, fruit, and tuber -bearing crops  (17) . Assemblies incorporated 

into plant pangenomes have been used primarily for variant -trait association studies, 

building repositories of resistance genes, and investigating wild relatives of crops  (28) . The 

application of the haplotype sampling algorithm in plant genome  scaffolding  may represent 

the next use of pangenome graphs, whereby pangenomes from publications or collections of 

public assemblies can be used to generate best -fit references for diverse target genome 

assemblies. 

Here, we introduce the noHiC pipeline, which encompasses key steps in reference -guided 

scaffolding , including removal of contaminant contigs, correction of contig misassemblies, 

contig scaffolding using a pangenome graph -based or a conventional reference genome, 

and assessment of assembly quality through metrics and visualizations. Notably, noHiC 

incorporates the pangenome haplotype sampling algorithm in the sub -script called nohic -

refpick to generate a personalized reference (synref) that is genetically close to the target 

genome and improves scaffold contiguity compared with th ose constructed from a single 

conventional reference.  Across all tests, assemblies scaffolded using noHiC generally showed 

strong structural consensus with Hi -C-based or manually curated public assemblies. This 

advantage of noHiC was also evident when an alternative tool was used to scaffold target 

genomes with synrefs generated by the noHiC sub -script.  Based on the results of our 

assembly evaluations, noHiC repr esents a promising pipeline for reference -guided contig 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

scaffolding when pangenome graphs are accessible and/or Hi -C sequencing data are not 

available .

MATERIAL AND METHODS 

noHiC Pipeline Overview 

The noHiC pipeline includes four sub -scripts that can be executed independently, including 

nohic -clean, nohic -refpick, nohic -asm , and nohic -eval . HiFi reads , or other error -corrected 

long reads , are required for nohic -refpick, nohic -asm , and nohic -eval . Detailed instructions for 

pipeline execution, sub -scripts, and the versions of required dependencies are available at: 

https://github.com/andyngh/noHiC .

Contaminant Contig Removal – nohic -clean 

The removal of contaminant contigs is performed by the nohic -clean subscript, using raw 

contigs generated by tools such as hifiasm (31) and Canu (32) as inputs. nohic -clean consists 

of four steps and can be restarted from a previously failed step using the “ --resume” flag. 

The subscript begins by screening contigs for the presence of sequencing adapters, based on 

user -specified adapter sequences. If adapters are detected in the input data, nohic -clean 

halts and outputs the names and sequences of the contigs containing adapters. Users may 

remove these adapter -containing contigs before resuming nohic -clean , or they may restart 

contig assembly after performing more effective adapter trimming of the reads. After 

confirming that the contigs are free of adapters, nohic -clean calls Kraken2 (33) and Taxonkit 

(34) to assign taxonomic origins to the contigs. At this stage, users must provide the path to 

a Kraken2 database and specify the taxonomic group from which the target contigs originate 

(e.g., Viridiplantae) to distinguish contaminants from target sequences. I n the subsequent 

optional step, users may choose to exclude contigs derived from organelles (mitochondria 

and chloroplasts) by supplying nohic -clean with reference organellar sequences. nohic -clean 

then uses BLASTn (35) to remove contigs showing ≥ 90% identity and query coverage 

relative to the reference organellar sequences. 

Personalized Reference Generation – nohic -refpick 

To build a personalized reference (synref) for scaffolding a target genome, users must 

provide nohic -refpick with a FASTQ file containing error -corrected long reads, a .gbz file  (36) ,

and a .hapl file  (30) . The pangenome graph in GBZ format and its haplotype information 

(.hapl files ) can be from previous publications or generated beforehand using pangenome 

graph builders such as Minigraph -Cactus  (37) .

Once the input data are specified, nohic -refpick first runs KMC  (38)  to count k -mers (default: 

29 bp) in the reads and stores them in a KFF file  (39) . This file, together with the .gbz 

and .hapl files, is then supplied to vg haplotypes  (30)  to generate a personalized graph for 

the target genome using the default haplotype sampling algor ithm . Briefly, the input 

pangenome graph is partitioned into 10 -kb blocks, from which graph -unique k -mers ,

occurring only once in the graph and effectively representing the incorporated haplotypes ,

are extracted. The algorithm then queries these graph -unique k -mers against KFF files 

generated from reads of the target genome. Based on k -mer counts and coverage, which are 

automatically estimated by vg haplotypes , the graph -unique k-mers detected in the KFF file 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

are classified as homozygous, heterozygous, or absent. In the final step, the best -fitting 

haplotypes from each 10 -kb block are selected according to the k -mer classification profile, 

resulting in a personalized graph  (30) . Extraction of the synref from the personalized graph is 

performed using vg paths (--extract -fasta). The resulting synref is an artificial recombinant 

reference genome generated by combining the best -fitting 10 -kb blocks from different 

haplotypes within the input pangenome graph. Users may either use the synref directly at 

this stage or further refine it (by gap patching) before employing it as a reference for 

reference -guided scaffolding of the target genome. 

To improve the quality of the synref, users may optionally enable gap patching with the --

patch (-p) flag , which starts the process of replacing gap s in the synref with sequences from 

a donor genome . Ideally, the donor genome used for synref patching is a gapless, T2T 

assembly. However, users may select any genome with the highest available contiguity within 

their species of interest as the donor.  In patching mode, an in -house script 

(“ Asm_Decomposing.sh ”) is executed to decompose the synref into contigs at gap positions. 

These synref contigs are then aligned to a user -specified high -quality donor genome using 

minimap2  (40) . The resulting SAM file is converted to BAM format with samtools view  (41) ,

and the BAM file is subsequently used as input for GPatch  (42)  to fill the gaps using 

sequences from the donor genome. 

Contig Error Correction and Scaffolding – nohic -asm 

The correction of contig misassemblies and subsequent scaffolding is performed by nohic -

asm , which consists of five computational steps: chimeric contig breaking based on clipped 

reads (i.e., reads that are only partially mapped) , correction of small misassemblies, 

coverage -based chimeric contig breaking, scaffolding, and gap closing. All steps are optional 

except scaffolding. As with nohic -clean , nohic -asm can be resumed from a previously failed 

step. 

nohic -asm calls CRAQ  (43)  in the first step of the pipeline to break chimeric contigs by 

mapping input long reads to the input contigs and identifying clipped reads as break signals. 

The default minimum proportion of clipped reads required to break a contig is 75%. Users 

may option ally choose to break heterozygous misjoins by applying the --ignore -het flag, 

which sets CRAQ’s --sms_clip_coverRate parameter to 55%. 

In the second step, Inspector  (44, 45)  is used to correct small misassemblies in the contigs 

(base substitutions, expansions, collapses, and inversions) using the input long reads. 

Remaining chimeric contigs are then broken using rag tag .py correct  (18) . Putative 

breakpoints are identified by aligning the input contigs to a reference genome (either the 

synref or another reference) and validated by detecting abnormal increases or decreases in 

read coverage inside a window (which can be 10 or 45 kb long) . The upper and lower 

coverage thresholds used to validate breakpoints are automatically determined by RagTag. 

nohic -asm provides five correction presets for this step, with the following parameters for 

rag tag .py correct :

draft : --aligner minimap2 --mm2 -params " -x asm5" -v 10,000 

luck : --aligner minimap2 --mm2 -params " -x asm5" -v 45,000 --remove -small 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

standard (default) : --aligner nucmer --nucmer -params " --maxmatch -l 100 -c 500" -v 45,000 

--remove -small 

aggressive : “standard” parameters plus -d 50,000 

raw : “standard” parameters without read validation and --remove -small 

Because minimap2 allows alignments between noisy query and target (reference) sequences 

through short exact matches (19 -bp minimizer seeds) under the “seed -chain -align” paradigm 

(40, 46) , its use in ragtag.py correct results in lower misassembly detection granularity 

compared with Nucmer (using -l 100). Consequently, the “draft” and “luck” options in nohic -

asm are considered relaxed correction presets, as they generate fewer contig breaks than the 

other presets. 

The “draft” preset applies only the default parameters of ragtag.py correct and is intended for 

users who aim to perform an initial assessment of assembly quality. The “luck” preset is also 

a relaxed correction mode but employs a larger window size (45 kb) for read -based 

validation of misassemblies, thereby increasing sensitivity to misjoin detection. In addition ,

the --remove -small flag is enabled in the “luck” preset to exclude alignments shorter than 1 

kb between the target and reference genomes. This re duces the likelihood that small 

alignments will incorrectly bridge larger syntenic regions 

(https://github.com/malonge/RagTag/wiki/correct ). Under favorable conditions, the “luck” 

preset can correct most chimeric contigs while minimizing unnecessary breaks and 

preserving overall assembly contiguity , which motivated its designation. 

Presets based on Nucmer (“standard”, “aggressive”, and “raw”) use longer exact seed 

matches (minimum length of 100 bp) for alignments between target and reference 

assemblies (47) . As a result, alignments are divided into a greater number of fragments, 

increasing the number of candidate misassemblies subjected to read -based validation and, 

consequently, producing more contig breaks. These Nucmer -based presets enforce closer 

conform ity between target and reference sequence arrangements and are intended for cases 

in which the reference genome is closely related to the target or when chimeric contigs 

cannot be resolved using relaxed presets. The “aggressive” preset applies a shorter ma ximum 

alignment merging distance (50 kb) than the “standard” preset (100 kb), leading to more 

unmerged alignments that are treated by ragtag.py correct as putative misassemblies (18) .

The “raw” preset uses alignment parameters similar to those of the “standard” preset but 

omits read -based validation, resulting in the breaking of all identified putative 

misassemblies. 

The corrected contigs are then oriented into scaffolds using rag tag .py scaffold  (18) . Gaps are 

closed using TGSGapcloser with the --ne option  (48) .

Assembly Quality Evaluation – nohic -eval 

The nohic -eval sub -script enables users to assess scaffolded assemblies across several 

criteria, including assembly contiguity , gene content completeness, and structural 

correctness. nohic -eval consists of five evaluation steps. First, contiguity metrics (e.g., N50, 

auN, number of gaps) and scaffold lengths are calculated using gfastats and bioawk (49) 

(https://github.com/lh3/bioawk ). BUSCO is then run with a user -specified lineage to evaluate 

the completeness of gene architecture (50) . In the third and fourth steps, regional and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

structural assembly quality indices (R -AQI and S -AQI) and the quality value (QV) are 

computed using CRAQ (43) and Inspector (44) to assess structural correctness.  AQI metrics 

are calculated as one hundred times the exponential of negative 0.1N divided by L, where N 

represents the cumulative normalized counts of CREs (clip -based regional errors) or CSEs 

(clip -based structural errors), and L denotes the assembly lengt h in megabases. In the 

context of noHiC, which does not require short reads for scaffolding, CREs correspond to 

gaps or regions spanned by long reads containing mismatches, whereas CSEs refer to 

regions characterized by c lipped long reads  (43) . QV is defined as minus ten times the base -

ten logarithm of E, where E is equal to the total number of bases involved in assembly errors 

divided by the assembly length in base pairs  (44) . In the final step of nohic -eval , an in -house 

R script, nohic -viz.R , is used to generate an error map showing misassemblies identified by 

CRAQ and Inspector across chromosomes. Synteny between the target assembly and a 

reference genome can also be visually assessed by a dot plot using paf2dotplot 

(https://github.com/moold/paf2dotplot ). Evaluation steps 2 -5 are optional. As with nohic -

clean and nohic -asm , users may resume nohic -eval from a previously failed step. 

Sequencing Data , Genome Assemblies , and Pangenome Collections 

HiFi reads from four plant species were used to generate contigs for testing the noHiC 

pipeline: Arabidopsis thaliana CAMA -C-2 (SRA: ERR10084604) (51) , Sorghum virgatum (SRA: 

SRR33597079) (52) , Glycine max cv. Wm82 -ISU -01 (SRA: SRR29929794 and SRR29929795) 

(53) , and  Hordeum vulgare  cv. Foma (SRA: ERR10665167, ERR10665168, ERR10665169, 

ERR10665170, and ERR10665171)  (54) . The original public assemblies for these four species 

were also used as controls for comparison with assemblies produced by noHiC. 

Four collections of 48, 11 , 21, and 10 public assemblies were used to construct pangenome 

graphs for A. thaliana (Ath ), S. bicolor (Sbi ), G. max (Gma ), and H. vulgare (Hvu ), respectively, 

using Minigraph -Cactus (cactus v2.9.9) (37) . The assembly of S. virgatum (Svi ) was scaffolded 

using the Sbi pangenome and reference (51, 54 –69) . Within each assembly collection, one 

assembly was selected as a conventional (or ordinary) reference (i.e. , a publicly available 

reference that is traditionally used as an input for reference -guided scaffolders ) to guide 

contig scaffolding with noHiC . Accession numbers for all public assemblies are provided in 

Supplementary Table S1 .

In the case of Sbi , the ordinary reference was not included in the pangenome graph 

collection, as this collection was also used in the assembly tests below involving our three in -

house sorghum accessions to evaluate the performance of synrefs relative to a closely 

related conventional reference. 

To assess the reusability of a pangenome graph in contig scaffolding , we used three of our 

Sbi accessions ( named SB14122, B108, and ORE -18 -14) and the mentioned pangenome 

graph containing the set of 11 public sorghum assemblies (55 –58, 67) (Supplementary 

Table S 1). 

Contig Assembly 

Before contig assembly, we randomly sampled from the four plant species mentioned above 

a HiFi read subset of 5 -7X coverage for each species and used these subsets only during the 

scaffold assembly evaluation process by nohic -eval . The read subsets were generated with 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

seqkit v2.10.1 (70) using a fixed random seed (3108). These subsets were not used in any 

other sub -scripts of noHiC requiring long reads as inputs. This approach avoided bias in 

comparisons, as nohic -asm uses long reads for contig correction , and original public 

assemblies were used in comparisons . The evaluation subsets corresponded to 10% of reads 

from Ath CAMA -C-2, 10% of reads from Svi 1.0, all reads from sequencing run ERR10665168 

for Hvu cv. Foma, and 25% of reads from Gm a cv. Wm82 -ISU -01 (SRA: SRR29929795). 

Contigs for each species were then assembled using the remaining HiFi reads as input and 

without Hi -C data. Hifiasm v0.25.0 -r726 (or v0.16.1 -r375 for Gma ) was used to assemble the 

contigs (31) .

In the evaluation of pangenome graph reusability for synref generation in the three Sbi 

genomes, no public assemblies were used as controls. Therefore, the full HiFi read sets were 

used to assemble contigs with Hifiasm v0.25.0 -r726 ( or v0.19.5 -r590 ) (31) .

Pangenome Graph’s  Reusability  for Scaffolding 

As described above, we constructed a small pangenome graph consisting of 11 Sbi 

assemblies and used it to generate synrefs for three Sbi target genomes (SB14122, B108, and 

ORE -18 -14) to assess the reusability of pangenome graphs to build synref s in contig 

scaffolding .

Contaminant and organellar contigs were removed using nohic -clean (parameters: -tg 

Viridiplantae -ioc yes -m no -kdb core_nt). PacBio adapter sequences used in this step are 

available at  https://github.com/andyngh/noHiC . Kraken2’s core_nt database was used for 

taxonomic classification (https://benlangmead.github.io/aws -indexes/k2 ). Chloroplast and 

mitochondrial genome sequences from NCBI of Sbi (NC_008602.1, NC_008360.1) (71) were 

provided via the -ros argument. 

Synref generation with nohic -refpick (-m 182 -k 29) was carried out with HiFi reads and 

pangenome graph indices (.gbz and .hapl) as inputs . For synref patching, the Hongyingzi 

genome (assembly ID: GCA_033546955.1) was used for the synref of SB14122  (55) , while 

B108 and ORE -18 -14 ’s synrefs were patched using the Sbi cv. CHBZ genome (assembly ID: 

GCA_040267525.1)  (57) .

To scaffold the clean contigs, nohic -asm was executed with two read -based correction 

presets, “luck” and “standard”, for each target genome to determine the conditions under 

which the advantages of synrefs were most apparent. Other parameters were as follows. 

--run -gap -closing yes --craq -params " -x map -hifi" --inspector -params " --datatype hifi" --

inspector -correct -params " --datatype pacbio -hifi" --ragtag -correct -params " -T corr" --

ragtag -scf -params " -C -r -g 2" --tgsgapcloser -params " --tgstype pb" 

The sequencing coverage values used for scaffolding were 20, 16, and 20 for SB14122, B108, 

and ORE -18 -14, respectively. Three different references were used for each target genome: 

BTx623 v5  (58) (the conventional reference most closely related to the targets); the gapless 

donor reference used for synref patching; and the patched synref. This resulted in six 

assemblies per target genome (two presets × three references). After scaffolding , nohic -eval 

(-p hifi -b embryophyta_odb12) was used to assess the quality of the resulting assemblies. 

Whole genome alignments between the three target genomes and BTx623 v5 were used to 

construct dot plots for misassembly visualizations. Putative misassemblies det ected by the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

dot plots were confirmed by read mapping using IGV 2.16  (72) . Contiguity metrics of the 

assemblies were calculated only for pseudo -chromosomes before gap closing. Metrics 

showing assembly correctness (AQIs and QV) were calculated for the whole assemblies after 

gap closing .

The computational test summary (Test 1) was illustrated in Figure 1. 

Comparing Assemblies G uid ed by Synref and Ordinary Reference in Different Species 

To compare the quality of assemblies scaffolded using synrefs versus conventional 

references in different plant species, we applied the noHiC pipeline to contigs from four 

species ( Ath CAMA -C-2, Svi , Gma cv. Wm82 -ISU -01, and Hvu cv. Foma). The corresponding 

original public assemblies generated with Hi -C data or manual curation served as controls 

(51 –54) .

Contig decontamination was performed using nohic -clean as described in the previous 

computational tests. Chloroplast and mitochondrial genome sequences from NCBI for Ath 

(NC_037304.1, NC_000932.1) (69) , Sbi  (NC_008602.1, NC_008360.1)  (71) , Gma  (CM021415.1, 

CM010429.1)  (60) , and  Hvu  (NC_008590.1, NC_056985.1, NC_042692.1, AP017300.1, 

AP017301.1)  (71, 73, 74) were supplied to enable removal of contigs originating from 

organelles. 

The sub -script nohic -refpick was used to generate unpatched synrefs for the four assemblies 

(-m 182 -p no -k 29) using HiFi reads and species -specific pangenome graph indices. The 

resulting clean contigs were then corrected and scaffolded for each species with two 

reference types usi ng nohic -asm : a conventional reference genome ( Table 1 ) and the 

corresponding unpatched synref. The nohic -asm script was executed using the “luck” 

correction preset. All other nohic -asm parameters were identical to those described above. 

Sequencing coverage values provided to nohic -asm were 63, 44, 23, and 43 for Ath , Svi , Hvu ,

and Gma , respectively. Assembly quality was evaluated using the nohic -eval sub -script as 

described above. Whole genome alignments between each noHiC -based assembly and its 

control (original public assembly) were used for building dot plots to detect misassemblies. 

For each species, three assemblies were evaluated : the original public assembly and the two 

assemblies produced by noHiC .

The summary for this computational test involving the four plant species (Test 2) was 

illustrated in Figure 1. 

Combining no HiC Sub -scripts with a Fast Scaffolder 

To demonstrate the flexibility of noHiC sub -scripts when used in combination with other 

scaffolders, clean contigs (outputs of nohic -clean ) from Ath CAMA -C-2, Svi , Gma cv. Wm82 -

ISU -01, and Hvu cv. Foma were scaffolded using ntJoin with the following parameters: 

reference_weights='2' g=1 k=32 w=1000 n=2 (with w=500 for Ath CAMA -C-2) (26) . The 

conventional references used for ntJoin are listed in Table 1 .

Because ntJoin breaks contigs without read -based validation, nohic -refpick was executed 

with patching using donor genomes ( Table 1 ) in cases where synrefs contained more gaps 

and/or exhibited lower contiguity than conventional references. This ensured that the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

potential benefits of synrefs were not underestimated due to false contig breaks. Generation 

of synrefs and a ssembly evaluation (for the whole assemblies) was performed by nohic -eval 

as described above. 

The summary for this ntJoin -based computational test (Test 3) was illustrated in Figure 1. 

Table 1. Conventional reference assemblies and donor genomes for synref patching of Ath, 

Svi, Gma, and, Hvu 

Species  Conventional reference  Donor genome 

Ath  TAIR10.1 (69)  -

Svi  BTx623 v5 (58)  Hongyingzi (55) 

Gma  Jack (59)  Jack (59) 

Hvu  Morex v3 (68)  Morex v3 (68) 

Genetic Distance between Synref s and Target Genome s

In parallel with scaffolding, Mash v2.3  (75)  was used with default parameters to calculate 

pairwise genetic distances among each clean contig assembly, its synref, its conventional 

reference, and the other assemblies within its respective pangenome collection. The resulting 

pairwise distance matrices were then used to construct Neighbor -Joining (NJ) trees with the 

ape and ggtree R packages  (76, 77)  to visualize the effectiveness of nohic -refpick in 

generating the reference most closely related to each target genome. 

Computational Resources 

The noHiC pipeline was primarily developed and tested on computing nodes at the 

Bioinformatics Core Facility of Justus Liebig University Giessen within the German Network 

for Bioinformatics Infrastructure (de.NBI). These nodes operated under Linux kernels 6.1.0 -

23 -amd64, 6.1.0 -26 -amd64, 6.1.0 -31 -amd64, 6.1.0 -37 -amd64, 6.1.0 -38 -amd64, 6.1.0 -40 -

amd64, 6.12.32+bpo -amd64, or 6.12.33+deb12 -amd64 and were managed using the Slurm 

job scheduling system. The available hardware resources ranged from 56 to 256 CPU cor es 

and from 498 to 1992 GB of memory. In addition, a de.NBI virtual machine was used during 

pipeline development, running a 64 -bit Ubuntu operating system with a Linux 6.8 kernel, 28 

CPU cores, and 251 GB of memory. 

AI Use Disclosure 

The core workflows of noHiC, which underpin the results presented in this study, were 

designed and structured using publicly available tools without the use of AI in computational 

tasks . The command -line interface (CLI), automation features, output structure, and several 

helper scripts of the noHiC pipeline ( nohic -viz.R and Asm_Decomposing.sh ) were 

conceptualized by the first author and implemented with assistance from ChatGPT5 

(OpenAI). These components were manually tested to ensure the correct execution of the 

pipeline .

The manuscript was proofread with the assistance of ChatGPT5. The content and structure of 

the manuscript were prepared by the authors without AI involvement. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

Figure 1: Summary of the three computational tests conducted in this study. Test 1 examines 

the reusability of a pangenome graph for generating multiple synrefs and identifies the 

correction preset in noHiC that best highlights the advantages of synrefs. Test 2 eval uates 

the effects of synrefs on contig scaffolding across four plant species. Test 3 assesses the 

flexibility of noHiC sub -scripts when combined with alternative scaffolding tools (ntJoin) . The 

figure was created with BioRender ( https://BioRender.com/70x3u2c ). 

RESULTS 

The noHiC Pipeline 

The noHiC pipeline encompasses all essential steps in reference -guided contig scaffolding 

through four sub -scripts (or sub -pipelines). An overview of the main steps is presented in 

Figure 2.

The primary objective underlying the design of noHiC is to mitigate the adverse effects of 

reference bias in reference -guided contig scaffolding, thereby producing assemblies that are 

both contiguous and structurally accurate. 

To accomplish this objective, the first step in the noHiC pipeline is to ensure that 

contaminant sequences present in the contig -level assembly do not compromise the 

structural integrity of subsequent scaffolding. Accordingly, nohic -clean is executed at the 

outset to perform taxonomic classification of contigs and remove contaminants (and, if 

desired, organellar DNA) prior to scaffolding. 

To reduce reference bias, nohic -refpick was created to select the most appropriate haplotype 

sequences from a pangenome graph and combine them into a synthetic personalized 

reference genome (synref) for scaffolding the target contigs , using the haplotype sampling 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

algorithm described by Sirén et al.  (30) . This approach ensures that the reference genome 

exhibits a high similarity in sequence organization to the target, reducing the likelihood of 

in accurate contig correction and placement in downstream steps. 

After preparing clean contigs and the synref, nohic -asm is used to polish the contigs and 

scaffold the corrected sequences into chromosomes. Three complementary strategies are 

implemented to ensure structural accuracy: clipped -read -based detection and breaking of 

chimeric contigs, correction of small misassemblies, and reference -guided correction to 

resolve remaining chimeric contigs. Corrected contigs are then oriented and concatenated 

into scaffolds according to the reference seque nce (ideally , the synref , although a 

conventional reference may also be used), and gaps are subsequently closed. 

Because a high -quality assembly must be both conti guous and accurate, nohic -eval provides 

a range of metrics and visualizations to assess assembly quality. Calculated contiguity metrics 

include N50 ; auN , the weighted sum of all Nx values (x from 0 to 100 ) (78, 79) ; number of 

gaps ; and total contig and scaffold lengths . These metrics are used to evaluate contig 

fragmentation and chromosome anchoring. Gene space completeness is assessed using 

BUSCO. Structural accuracy is assessed through metrics such as the structural and regional 

assembly quality indices (S -AQI and R -AQI) and the quality value (QV) . V isualizations 

illustrate misassembly locations and syntenic relationships between the target genome and a 

high -quality reference. 

Figure  2: Diagram illustrating the computational tasks performed by the four sub -pipelines 

of noHiC. Cyan arrows indicate subsequent steps in which the final output of a sub -pipeline 

is used. Dashed arrows denote the steps in the pipeline that incorporate long reads . The 

figure was created with BioRender ( https://BioRender.com/gpz1mxx ). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

Reusability of Pangenome Graphs for Generating Synrefs that Preserve Contig 

Contiguity 

We collected 11 public S. bicolor (Sbi ) assemblies (Supplementary Table S 1) and 

constructed a pangenome graph, which was subsequently used to generate synrefs for 

scaffolding three in -house sorghum accessions, namely SB14122, B108, and ORE -18 -14. The 

nohic -asm sub -pipeline was executed using two presets (“luck” and “standard”) and three 

reference types for each target assembly: the patched synref, BTx623 v5 (standard reference) ,

and the donor genome used for synref gap patching (NCBI assembly IDs: GCA_033546955.1 

– Hongyingzi or GCA_040267525.1 – CHBZ ). For clarity, these reference genomes are referred 

to in this subsection and related ones as synref [P] , V5, and P, respectively. V5 is genetically 

closer to the target genomes than the other assemblies used to construct the pangenome 

graph. In the case of ORE -18 -14, one assembly in the pangenome collection, S. bicolor 654 

T2T (GCA_048338455.1), is nearly as closely related to the target accession as V5. The two 

donor genomes in the P reference category are gapless assemblies. 

The “luck” preset applies relatively relaxed contig correction, whereas the “standard” preset 

enforces stricter correction by constraining contig structure to more closely follow the 

reference. In total, six assemblies were generated for each Sbi accession (two presets × three 

references). This analysis was designed to address the following questions: (i) whether the 

benefits of synrefs in scaffolding are retained when a single pangenome graph is reused 

across multiple assemblies; (ii) whether a s ynref [P] performs better than the genetically 

closest assembly for target genome scaffolding; (iii) whether a synref [P] outperforms the 

gapless P references; and (iv) whether the advantages of synrefs are more evident under 

relaxed or strict correction presets. 

The first observed positive effect of nohic -refpick was the generation of synrefs that closely 

match their target genomes. Specifically, the synrefs and synref [P] s for SB14122, B108, and 

ORE -18 -14 are genetically closer to their respective targets than V5 and the other assemblies 

included in the pangenome collection, as shown by the Neighbor -Joining (NJ) trees in 

Figure 3. These results demonstrate that patching synrefs with donor genomes does not 

significantly alter the genetic relationship between a synref and its corresponding target 

assembly. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Figure 3: NJ tree constructions including the target Sbi assemblies SB14122 ( A), B108 ( B), 

and ORE -18 -14 ( C) (red dots), the corresponding synrefs ( lavender dots), synref[P]s (green 

dots), V5 (blue dots), P references (cyan dots), and the remaining assemblies in the 

pangenome collection (gray dots). In all three cases, the synref s and synref[P]s are the 

assembl ies most closely related to the target. 

In -chromosome contig contiguity metrics (i.e. , the contiguity metrics for contigs placed in 

pseudo -chromosomes after scaffolding) prior to gap closing, including total contig length 

(Mb) , contig number, contig auN (Mb) , and gap number, were calculated for all six 

assemblies generated for each target Sbi accession. 

To identify the correction preset that best highlights the benefits of synref [P] s, percentage 

changes in contig contiguity metrics were calculated between synref [P] -based assemblies 

and their corresponding V5 - or P -based counterparts by subtracting the V5 - or P -based 

values from the synref [P] -based values, dividing the change by the V5 - or P -based values, 

and multiplying the result by 100.  For each preset, this yielded six comparisons per metric, 

corresponding to three target assemblies and two reference co ntrasts (synref [P] versus V5 

and synref [P] versus P) ( Figure 4). 

When percentage changes in the four contig contiguity metrics were calculated between 

assemblies guided by synref [P] s and those guided by V5 or P references, the advantages of 

synref [P] s in reducing contig fragmentation during reference -guided error correction were 

most evident under the “standard” preset ( Figure 4). Although assemblies scaffolded with 

synref [P] s generally showed higher contig auN values and lower contig numbers than those 

guided by other references under both the “luck” and “standard” presets, the effect of 

synref [P] s on preserving contig contiguity was significantly greater in the “standard” preset 

tha n in the “luck” preset ( p < 0.05). The maximum observed increases in contig auN and 

reductions in contig number were 65.05% and 31.56%, respectively ( Figure 4B & C). Under 

both presets, changes in total anchored contig length between assemblies guided by 

synref [P] s and those guided by other references were not significant, with values generally 

ranging from 0 to 0.5% ( Figure 4A). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

Figure 4: Assessment of the contig contiguity -preserving effect of synref [P] s during 

reference -guided error correction under the “luck” and “standard” presets, based on 

percentage changes in total contig length (A), contig number (B), contig auN (C), and gap 

number (D) between assemblies guided by synref [P] s and those guided by V5 or P 

references. The data points with different colors show reference contrasts in metrics. 

Statistical comparisons were performed using independent t-tests with α = 0.05. 

Figure 5 provides a more detailed presentation of the results shown in Figure 4. Under the 

“luck” correction preset, increases in contig auN for assemblies guided by synref [P] s relative 

to those guided by the V5 reference ranged from 0.121 to 0.384 Mb. Notably, for B108 under 

the “luck” preset, the synref [P] -guided assembly exhibited an approximately 0.43 Mb lower 

contig auN than the assembly guided by V5 ( Figure 5A). In contrast, when the stricter 

“standard” correction preset was applied, no reductions in contig auN were observed for 

assemblies guided by synref [P] s relative to V5 , and the maximum auN increase reached 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

approximately 1.3 Mb ( Figure 5B). A similar pattern was observed for contig number. Under 

the “luck” preset, the maximum reduction in contig number when comparing synref [P] - and 

V5 -guided assemblies was eight contigs, whereas under the “standard” preset, this reduction 

increased to a maximum of 150 contigs ( Figure 5). The contig contiguity -preserving effect of 

synref [P] s during correction relative to V5 was also evident in total anchored contig length, 

which was consistently higher in synref [P] -guided assem blies under both presets, with length 

increases ranging from 1.022 to 4.148 Mb ( Figure 5). 

The P references were shown in Figure 5 to be the least effective reference type for target 

contig correction and scaffolding. Assemblies built using these references consistently 

exhibited lower contig auN values, higher contig numbers, and higher gap numbers than 

assemblies guided by synref [P] s or V5 under both the “luck” and “standard” presets. Despite 

being gapless genomes, the P references were not effective in reducing break number (i.e., 

the difference in total contig counts before and after correction ) during contig correction 

prior to s caffolding (Supplementary Figures S1 & S2 ). 

Figure 5: Comparison of in -chromosome contig contiguity metrics for assemblies scaffolded 

using synref [P] , V5, and P references under the “luck” ( A) and “standard” ( B) presets. 

With respect to structural correctness metrics, the examined assemblies showed only minor 

differences in QV, R -AQI, and S -AQI across most cases, with the exception of QV values 

under the “standard” preset. For the B108 accession, the QV of the assembly sca ffolded using 

the P reference was approximately five units lower than those scaffolded using synref [P] and 

V5. In SB14122, the QV of the synref [P] -guided assembly decreased from 46.02 to 43.39 

relative to the V5 -guided assembly . However, this reduction in QV was modest, representing 

a 5.71% decrease compared with the V5 case ( Figure 6). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

Figure 6: Comparison of structural correctness metrics for assemblies scaffolded using 

synref [P] , V5, and P references under the “luck” ( A) and “standard” ( B) presets. 

To further assess the structural correctness of all Sbi assemblies generated by noHiC, dot 

plots were constructed to illustrate syntenic relationships between V5 and the noHiC 

assemblies. Across all three accessions, the “luck” preset failed to correct large -scale 

misassemblies, manifested as false interchromosomal translocations. To find the reasons, we 

mapped reads to the scaffolded chromosomes and observed secondary alignments near the 

boundaries of these misjoins, which likely interfered with both read -clip -based and contig -

alignment -based chimeric contig breaking processes. These misassemblies were caused by 

the contig assembler since sequences from different chromosomes were joined together in 

single chimeric contigs (Supplementary Figures S3 -S5 ). These translocations occurred 

between chromosomes 4 and 1 in SB14122 (Figure 7A), chromosomes 5 and 6 and 

chromosomes 4 and 7 in B108 (Figure 7B & C), and chromosomes 4 and 7 in ORE -18 -14 

(Figure 7D). The misassemblies were corrected or markedly reduced when the “standard” 

preset was applied. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

Figure 7: Examination of syntenic relationships between noHiC assemblies (y -axes) and V5 

(x -axes) , showing false interchromosomal translocations under the “luck” preset (left panels) 

for SB14122 ( A), B108 ( B, C), and ORE -18 -14 ( D). Misassemblies corrected by the “standard” 

preset are shown in the right panels. Dot plots are shown for assemblies guided by synref [P] s

as representative examples. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Synref ’s Positive Effects in Contig Scaffoldings of Different Species 

We scaffold ed genomes from four species, including A. thaliana CAMA -C-2 ( Ath CAMA -C-2), 

S. virgatum (Svi ), G. max cv. Wm82 -ISU -01 ( Gma cv. Wm82 -ISU -01), and H. vulgare cv. Foma 

(Hvu cv. Foma) using noHiC with two reference types, namely a synref and a conventional 

reference genome ( Table 1 ), to assess whether the advantages of synrefs could be observed 

across different plant species. The conventional references listed in Table 1 are NCBI 

reference genomes or the subsequent versions of those references. The Jack genome was 

selected as a gapless and genetically close reference for the contig scaffolding of Gma cv. 

Wm82 -ISU -01. Public original assemblies constructed using Hi -C data (or manual curation in 

the case of Ath ) were selected as controls for evaluating the assemblies generated by noHiC. 

Comparing assemblies guided by synrefs, ordinary references, and controls will determine if 

selecting an assembly labeled as a “reference” in NCBI reliably guides a target genome 

scaffolding. 

As shown in Figures 4, 5, & 7, although the “standard” preset effectively highlighted the 

advantages of synrefs for contig scaffolding and corrects contig misjoins that were not 

detected by relaxed presets such as “luck,” it also substantially reduce d contig auN. This 

indicates that, unless hard -to -detect chimeric contigs are present or the reference genome 

has a highly similar sequence organization to the target genome, the “standard” preset 

should not be the initial choice, despite being the default option. Accordingly, in this 

compu tational evaluation of noHiC involving target assemblies from four plant species, the 

nohic -asm sub -script was executed using the “luck” preset with unpatched synrefs. Because 

most conventional references were not the genomes most closely related to the target 

assemblies, the “luck” preset was selected instead of the “standard” preset to avoid bias in 

favor of synrefs that could arise if assemblies guided by conventional references became 

excessively fragmented under strict correction. 

Consistent with the phylogenetic relationships observed for the three sorghum assemblies, 

synrefs for the four examined plant species were also the closest references to their 

respective target genomes based on genetic distance ( Figure 8). This advantage of synrefs 

was observed across pangenomes with varying numbers of haplotypes, ranging from 10 in 

barley to 48 in Arabidopsis .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Figure 8: Visualization of NJ phylogenetic trees for Ath (A), Svi (B), Gma (C), and Hvu (D). 

Red, green, blue, and grey dots denote the target contig -level assemblies, synrefs, ordinary 

references, and other assemblies in the pangenome collections, respectively. 

As shown in Figure 9A and B, scaffold contiguity metrics, including total scaffold length and 

scaffold auN, were largely comparable between assemblies generated using synrefs and 

those generated using conventional reference genomes. 

Once again, the advantages of synrefs were most clearly reflected in in -chromosome contig 

contiguity metrics prior to gap closing . For contig auN, three of the four species (excluding 

Gma ) showed clear increases ranging from 1 0.2 5% to 73.20% when synrefs were used 

instead of conventional references (Figure 9D). In the case of Ath CAMA -C-2, the synref -

guided assembly exhibited contig and gap numbers comparable to those of the control 

assembly and 2.38 -fold and 3.25 -fold lower, respectively, than the assembly guided by 

TAIR10.1 ( Figure 9C & E). 

Hvu cv. Foma was the species in which synref showed the strongest contiguity -preserving 

effects. Specifically, noHiC assemblies were more fragmented than the control assembly 

(Figure 9C, D & E). Assemblies constructed using the Morex v3 reference genome had 

contig and gap numbers approximately three times higher than those of the control. In 

contrast, the synref maintained a strong contiguity -preserving effect, reducing contig and 

gap numbers by more than 51% relative to the Morex v3 -guided assembly (Figure 9C & E).

Svi represented a distinct case in which noHiC assemblies showed higher contiguity than the 

Hi -C-based control ( S. virgatum 1.0). The noHiC assembly guided by the conventional BTx623 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

v5 reference exhibited nearly an eightfold increase in contig auN compared with the control, 

along with 19 -fold and 24 -fold reductions in contig number and gap number (Figure 9C, D 

& E), respectively. The synref -guided Svi assembly showed even greater improvements, with 

nearly ninefold increases in contig auN relative to the public Hi -C-based control assembly 

(Figure 9D). 

Consistent with observations from the three sorghum assemblies described above, under the 

“luck” preset, Gma was the only species for which synref did not show a clear advantage over 

a gapless reference genome that is genetically close to the Wm82 -ISU -01 genome (genetic 

distance: 0.16%). In this case, only minimal differences were observed between synref - and 

co nventional reference -guided assemblies, including a 2.40% increase in contig auN, a 4.08% 

reduction in contig number, and an approximately 7% reduct ion in gap number (Figure 9C, 

D & E). 

In most cases, structural correctness metrics did not differ substantially between assemblies 

guided by synrefs and those guided by conventional references, with the exception of Ath ,

for which the QV of the synref -guided assembly was approximately 8.96% higher than that 

of the assembly guided by the conventional reference TAIR10.1. BUSCO completeness values 

for the noHiC assemblies were comparable to those of the control assemblies ( Figure 9F, G,

H & I). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

Figure 9: Comparison of in -chromosome contiguity and structural correctness metrics 

among conventionally guided assemblies (category “Ordinary”), synref -based assemblies 

(category “Synref”), and control assemblies (category “Control”) for four plant species ( Ath ,

Svi , Gma , and Hvu ). 

With respect to synteny analyses between noHiC assemblies and their public counterparts, 

the synref -guided assembly of Ath CAMA -C-2 showed better agreement with the control 

than the assembly generated using the TAIR10.1 reference, which exhibited false 

chromosomal translocations between chromosomes 1 and 5. In the case of Svi , both noHiC 

assemblies contained longer centromeric regions than the Svi 1.0 assembly. Gma was the 

only species in which a sequence misarrangement was detected, occurring on chromosome 

17 in the synref -guided assembly. This might be due to the Gma unpatched synref (see the 

scaffolding results with the patched one in Figure 1 2). For Hvu , both noHiC assemblies 

showed good syntenic correspondence with the public Hvu cv. Foma assembly ( Figure 10 ,

Supplementary Figures S6 -S9). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Figure 10 : Visualization of dot plots showing whole -genome alignments between synref -

based assemblies (category “Synref”) (A) or conventionally guided assemblies (category 

“Ordinary”) (B) and control genomes (x-axes ) for four plant species. Each square containing a 

diagonal represents a chromosome. Chromosomes are ordered according to their lengths in 

the control assemblies. 

The Flexibility of noHiC Pipeline when Combined with a Fast Scaffolder 

Recognizing that each contig correction step in nohic -asm requires substantial 

computational time, we replaced nohic -asm with ntJoin, an ultra -fast scaffolder, to correct 

and scaffold contigs from Ath CAMA -C-2, Svi , Gma cv. Wm82 -ISU -01, and Hvu cv. Foma 

(Table 2 ). This analysis aimed to assess whether nohic -refpick and nohic -clean can be flexibly 

combined with other fast scaffolding algorithms to improve assembly quality compared with 

the use of a single reference. Because ntJoin does not rely on sequence alignment and 

breaks contigs without read -based validation, the scaffolding of Svi , Gma cv. Wm82 -ISU -01, 

and Hvu cv. Foma were guided by patched synrefs (synref[P]s) (Table 1 ) to ensure that gaps 

did not limit the benefits of synrefs. The synref for Ath CAMA -C-2 was left unpatched, as it 

exhibited higher contiguity than TAIR10.1. 

Table 2 . Computational resources required for contig correction and scaffolding using nohic -

asm and ntJoin 

Scaffolding tool  Species  Used CPU core 

number 

Memory use 

(GB) 

Run time 

(d -hh:mm:ss) 

nohic -asm  Ath  21  68.28  01:00:49 

nohic -asm  Svi  40  207  10:39:08 

nohic -asm  Gma  36  193.12  09:58:34 

nohic -asm  Hvu  35  259.32  2-23:40:20 

ntJoin  Ath  1 1.76  00:01:45 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

ntJoin  Svi  2 12.29  00:04:52 

ntJoin  Gma  3 7.15  00:02:39 

ntJoin  Hvu  3 17.40  00:11:19 

Note: Because assemblies were performed twice for each species using a conventional 

reference and a synref or synref[P] , the values reported correspond to the assemblies with 

higher computational demands. 

As shown in Supplementary Table S2 , ntJoin assemblies generally exhibited higher contig 

counts than those generated by noHiC, indicating that ntJoin introduced a greater number 

of contig breaks. However, i n contrast to assemblies scaffolded using nohic -asm , ntJoin 

assemblies guided by a synref or synref[P] (synref/synref[P]) exhibited more pronounced 

improvements compared to conve ntionally guided assemblies in scaffold contiguity metrics, 

including total scaffold length (Mb) and scaffold auN (Mb) . Specifica lly, when 

synref /synref[P] -guided assemblies were compared with those based on conventional 

references, percentage increases in total scaffold length and scaffold auN ranged from 3.52% 

to 39.34 % and from 2.33% to 1 6.20 %, respectively ( Figure 1 1A & B). 

Despite being applied with a different scaffolding algorithm, synrefs /synref[P]s continued to 

show strong effects in limiting contig fragmentation during correction. Specifically, 

synref /synref[P] -guided assemblies for all four species exhibited higher contig auN values 

than those guided by conventional references. For all species, the increases in contig auN 

were substantial, ranging from 39.55% to 57.77% (Figure 1 1D). Consistent with the contig 

auN results, the use of synrefs (or synref[P]s) in ntJoin -based scaffolding also reduced contig 

and gap numbers for Ath , Gma , and Hvu , with reductions of 76.22%, 36.61%, and 51.92% in 

contig number and 82.26%, 54.05%, and 53.27% in gap number, respectively (Figure 11 C &

E). Notably, for Gma cv. Wm82 -ISU -01, although both the synref [P] and the conventional 

reference (the Jack genome) were gapless, assemblies derived from the synref [P] still showed 

higher contig auN values, as well as lower contig and gap numbers, than assemblies guided 

by the geneticall y close, gapless Jack reference (Figure 1 1C, D & E).

BUSCO completeness values, which have been reported to show little sensitivity to reference 

genome choice in previous comparisons , were higher in ntJoin assemblies guided by 

synrefs /synref[P]s . Specifically, BUSCO completeness values for synref /synref[P] - and 

conventional -reference -guided assemblies were 99.1% and 93.9% for Ath CAMA -C-2, 7 7.5%

and 60% for Svi , 96.8% and 92.5% for Hvu cv. Foma, and 99.6% and 98.8% for Gma cv. 

Wm82 -ISU -01, respectively ( Figure 1 1F). 

Regarding structural correctness metrics, ntJoin assemblies derived from synrefs /synref[P]s 

generally exhibited higher R -AQI, S -AQI, and QV values than those guided by conventional 

references ( Figure 1 1G, H & I). The most pronounced improvements in structural 

correctness for synref /synref[P] -guided assemblies were observed for the QV metric, with 

increases of 25.03, 6.22 , 5.58, and 9.86 units for Ath , Svi , Hvu , and Gma , respectively ( Figure 

11). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

Figure 11: Comparison of contiguity and structural correctness metrics (calculated from 

whole assemblies) among ntJoin assemblies constructed with different references for four 

plant species ( Ath , Svi , Gma , and Hvu ). The categories “Ordinary”, “Synref”, and “Control” are 

for conventionally guided assemblies, synref /synref[P] -based assemblies, and or iginal public 

assemblies, respectively. 

ntJoin assemblies derived from synrefs (or synref[P] s) showed better syntenic agreement with 

the control assemblies than those guided by conventional references in three of the four 

species examined ( Ath CAMA -C-2, Gma cv. Wm82 -ISU -01, and Hvu cv. Foma) (Figure 1 2A).

Specifically, in the Ath case, the assembly guided by the TAIR10.1 reference showed a 

shortened chromosome 2 and false chromosomal translocations between chromosomes 1 

and 4. In Hvu cv. Foma, the assembly scaffolded using the Morex v3 reference exhibited false 

chromosomal translocations involving chromosomes 2H, 3H, 4H, 6H, and 7H. For Gm a cv. 

Wm82 -ISU -01, the assembly derived from the Jack reference showed a shortened 

chromosome 9 and a large false chromosomal translocation between chromosomes 3 and 7 

(Figure 1 2B). Svi was the on ly case in which assemblies guided by both the synref [P] and the 

BTx623 v5 reference did not align well with the control public assembly ( Svi 1.0) . However, 

the diagonal pattern, showing sequence agreement between ntJoin assemblies and the 

controls, is more obvious in the synref [P] -based assembly compared to the ordinary -guided 

one. (Figure 1 2, Supplementary Figure s S1 0-S13 ). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

Figure 1 2 : Visualization of dot plots showing whole -genome alignments between 

synref /synref[P] -based assemblies (category “Synref”) (A) or conventionally guided ntJoin 

assemblies (category “Ordinary”) (B) and control genomes (x-axes ) for four plant species. 

Each square containing a diagonal represents a chromosome. Chromosomes are ordered 

according to their lengths in the control assemblies. 

DISCUSSION 

In this study, we designed and evaluated the noHiC pipeline, which was developed to apply 

multiple strategies to ensure the quality of reference -guided contig scaffolding. The pipeline 

removes contaminant DNA sequences originating from non -target taxonomic groups 

present in the input contigs, thereby reducing the risk of false interpretations in evolutionary 

and interspecific lateral gene transfer analyses based on the scaffolded genomes  (80 –82) . In 

addition, because noHiC does not rely on optical mapping  (83)  or Hi -C sequencing data  (84) ,

which are commonly used for validation and correction of contig misjoins  (43, 85) , three 

complementary contig polishing approaches were implemented in nohic -asm to correct 

small errors and to break potentially misassembled junctions  (18, 43, 44) . However, because 

contig misjoin correction relies on alignment to a reference genome, noHiC may incorrectly 

break truly contiguous contigs. To address this limitation, we created nohic -refpick to 

generate a personalized reference (synref) for each target assembly using a pangenome 

graph -based haplotype sampling algorithm  (30) . The synref is an artificial genome composed 

of 10 -kb fragments that best match the target genome, enabling the incorporation of 

genetic information from large numbers of reference genomes in a pangenome graph for 

scaffolding - up to 48 genomes in the case of A. thaliana - without directly aligning to each 

reference. The positive effects of synrefs in alleviating reference bias primarily involve 

preservation of contig contiguity during reference -guided correction, which are consistently 

demonstrated in the analyses described below. 

We evaluated the use of the noHiC pipeline with different synrefs derived from a n 11-

haplotype pangenome graph for scaffolding three sorghum accessions, namely SB14122, 

B108, and ORE -18 -14. Analysis of the relationships among each target accession, the synref, 

the V5 reference, the P reference, and other accessions included in the pangenome graph 

showed that a single pangenome graph can be reused to generate genetically best -fitting 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

references for multiple assemblies of the same species. Using two contig correction presets 

(“luck” and “standard”), we found that the contig break -prevention effect of synrefs was most 

evident when contigs from a target genome were constrained to adopt sequence 

arrangements similar to those of the reference genome , as in the “standard” preset. 

Assemblies generated using a strict correction preset can exhibit lower contig contiguity 

than those produced under more relaxed preset s. However, strict correction is required in 

cases where secondary read alignments bypass relaxed correction strategies, leaving 

misjunctions in contigs undetected. Under such conditions, the contig contiguity -preserving 

effects of synrefs are particularly advantageous. Comparisons of synrefs with other reference 

types, including the genetically closest reference to the target genomes aside from synrefs 

and gapless sorghum genomes, under the strict contig correc tion preset showed consistent 

improvements in contig conti guity metrics when synrefs were used for target genome 

scaffolding. Therefore , relative to the use of synrefs, relying solely on a closely related or 

gapless genome as a reference is insufficient to overcome reference bias during contig 

correction and scaffolding. 

The demonstrated reusability of pangenome graphs for generating best -fit references 

distinguishes noHiC from other multi -reference scaffolders. Users can construct a high -

quality pangenome graph that captures extensive genetic diversity across multiple ava ilable 

genomes and subsequently use this graph to generate different synrefs for future scaffolding 

projects. By employing nohic -refpick for synref generation, users are not required to perform 

reference weight optimization, as is necessary in ntJoin  (26) 

(https://github.com/bcgsc/ntJoin ). In addition, unlike Ragout2 -based scaffolding, noHiC does 

not require repeated updating of alignments between the target genome and multiple 

references whenever a new assembly project is initiated. The use of nohic -refpick reduces the 

alignment task from multiple genome -to -genome alignments to a single alignment between 

the synref and the target genome  (20, 27) 

(https://github.com/ComparativeGenomicsToolkit/cactus/blob/master/doc/updating -

alignments.md ).  Similarly, in contrast to multi -CSAR  (25) , noHiC eliminates the need to 

repeatedly align each new target genome against multiple individual references, as the 

alignment is performed only against the generated synref. 

The prevention of contig breakage through the use of synrefs during reference -guided 

correction and scaffolding was also clearly observed in most of the plant species tested ( Ath ,

Svi , and Hvu ), which include both monocots and dicots and span a wide range of genome 

sizes (approximately 135 Mb to 4.2 Gb), when scaffolding results based on synrefs were 

compared with those based on NCBI references (or the subsequent NCBI reference version). 

These results indicate that the noHiC pipeline has the potential to be applied broadly to 

contig scaffolding across diverse plant species. In addition, the findings suggest that 

straightforward use of an NCBI reference alone as a guide for contig correction and 

scaffolding is insufficient to ensure assembly contiguity during contig correction. However, 

under relaxed contig correction conditions , where correction relies on sequence alignments 

with an aligner that do es not require long exact seed matches between target and reference 

genomes (e.g. , minimap2), synrefs may not outperform a highly contiguous conventional 

reference that is genetically close to the target genome , as observed in three sorghum 

accessions and Gma cv. Wm82 -ISU -01 .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

In terms of structural correctness , noHiC has the capacity to generate reference -guided 

assemblies that are structurally consistent with public Hi -C-based or manually curated 

genomes (controls) . Assemblies that are highly syntenic to public controls can be obtained 

using unpatched synrefs (in most cases) or a gapless reference closely related to the target 

genome. These observations are reproducible and remain evident when patched synrefs are 

applied with an alternative scaffolding tool. Thus, noHiC provides a reliable approach for 

generating chromosome -scale assemblies while reducing the need for Hi -C sequencing data. 

The running time of nohic -asm is substantially increased by four steps that require read 

mapping to contigs or scaffolds, including CRAQ, Inspector, ragtag.py correct , and 

TGSGapcloser. As a result, users may prefer to employ an ultra -fast scaffolder such as ntJoin 

for contig correction and scaffolding when computational time is a limiting factor. In such 

cases, noHiC remains applicable, as users can leverage publicly available pangenome graphs 

and apply nohic -refpick to generate a best -fit reference for co ntig correction and scaffolding. 

Our analyses showed that combining ntJoin and noHiC’s subscripts ( nohic -clean and nohic -

refpick ) markedly reduced runtime and computational resource requirements for these tasks. 

However, ntJoin assemblies generally exhibited higher contig counts (a sign of increased 

contig breakage during reference -guided correction ) than those generated by noHiC. This 

indicates that, although the read -mapping -based contig -breaking steps in noHiC 

substantially increase computational time and resource requirements, they play an important 

role in limiting excessive contig fragmentation. Consequently, users should carefully consider 

the trade -off between scaffolding time and as sembly quality before combining noHiC sub -

scripts with alternative scaffolding tools. 

In addition, assembly results obtained by combining nohic -refpick with the non -alignment -

based correction and scaffolding strategy of ntJoin indicate that the advantages of synrefs 

are not restricted to the noHiC pipeline . Spec ifically, ntJoin assemblies guided by synrefs 

showed clear improvements over those guided by conventional references across multiple 

metrics and syntenic analyses in all of the plant species tested. These results demonstrate the 

flexibility and effectiveness of nohic -refpick when used in combination with alternative 

scaffolding methods. Notably, in the case of Gma cv. Wm82 -ISU -01, the synref -guided 

assembly outperformed the Jack reference, despite the latter being a gapless genome 

genetically close to the target. Thus, a gapless genome closely related to the target is not 

necessarily the optimal reference for all scaffolding algorithms. Svi was the only case in which 

new assemblies were of lower qualit y than the control assembly ( Svi 1.0), indicating that 

ntJoin is highly species -specific and may not be suitable for scaffolding even when the 

reference genome originates from a closely related but distinct species. 

Despite the advantages described above, synref -guided contig scaffolding has a limitation. 

The haplotype sampling algorithm selects the best -fitting 10 -kb DNA segments from 

haplotypes within a pangenome graph and combines them to create a synref for the target 

genome  (30) , but it does not include a mechanism to verify the correctness of these 

segments. As a result, synrefs may inherit assembly errors present in haplotypes derived from 

low -quality genomes, potentially affecting the outcome of reference -guided scaffolding. 

The refore, users should ensure that the individual reference genomes incorporated into a 

pangenome graph are of high quality before applying noHiC for contig scaffolding. For 

example, running nohic -eval to assess the quality of public genomes included in the 

pangenome graph is an effective approach to verify their suitability. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The graphical abstract was created by Biorender ( https://BioRender.com/2wwli91) .

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

An Nguyen -Hoang : Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Validation, and 

Writing -original draft . Kübra Arslan : Methodology and Writing -review & editing .

Venkataramana Kopalli : Formal analysis and Writing -review & editing . Steffen 

Windpassinger : Resources . Dragan Perovic : Resources  and Writing -review & editing . Andreas 

Stahl : Resources . Agnieszka Golicz : Conceptualization , Validation, Supervision, and Writing -

review & editing .

All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. 

SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 

Supplementary Figures: 

Break counts introduced by noHiC during reference -guided contig correction using the 

“luck” ( Figure S1 ) and “standard” ( Figure S2 ) presets for three sorghum accessions with 

three reference types (V5, P, and synref[P]). Read mapping at the boundaries of false 

interchromosomal translocations in the SB14122 ( Figure S3 ), B108 ( Figure S4 ), and ORE -18 -

14 ( Figure S5 ) noHiC sorghum assemblies (“luck” correction preset) . Whole -genome 

alignments between conventionally guided or synref -guided noHiC assemblies and the 

corresponding public control assemblies for Ath (Figure S6 ), Svi (Figure S7 ), Gma (Figure 

S8 ), and Hvu (Figure S9 ). Whole -genome alignments between conventionally guided or 

synref -guided ntJoin assemblies and the corresponding public control assemblies for Ath 

(Figure S10 ), Svi (Figure S11 ), Gma (Figure S12 ), and Hvu (Figure S13 ). 

Supplementary Table s:

Genome assemblies included in the pangenome graph collections and control genomes 

used in assembly tests for At h, Sbi , Svi, Gma , and Hvu (Table S1 ). Comparison of contig 

counts between noHiC - and ntJoin -based whole assemblies, including pseudochromosomes 

and unplaced contigs (Table S2 ).

Supplementary Data statement 

Supplementary Data are available at NAR online. 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

None declared 

FUNDING 

This work was supported by the German Research Foundation ( Deutsche 

Forschungsgemeinschaft - DFG ) in the framework of GRK 2843 ; the Federal Ministry of 

Research, Technology and Space (Bundesministerium für Forschung, Technologie und 

Raumfahrt - BMFTR ) in the framework of the project SorBOOM [031B1544 ]; and LOEWE Start 

Professorship from Hessian Ministry of Science and Research, Arts and Culture (Hessisches 

Ministerium für Wissenschaft und Forschung, Kunst und Kultur ).

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

The pangenome graphs, contig assemblies, synrefs, scaffolded assemblies, and scripts 

underlying this study are available at Zenodo under DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.18720982. 

REFERENCES 

1. Abbas,Q., Wilhelm,M., Kuster,B., Poppenberger,B. and Frishman,D. (2024) Exploring crop 

genomes: assembly features, gene prediction accuracy, and implications for 

proteomics studies. BMC Genomics , 25 , 619. 

2. Michael,T.P. and VanBuren,R. (2020) Building near -complete plant genomes. Current 

Opinion in Plant Biology , 54 , 26 –33. 

3. Yang,Y., Du,W., Li,Y., Lei,J. and Pan,W. (2025) Recent advances and challenges in de novo 

genome assembly. GCOMM , 2, 0 –0. 

4. Hu,H., Wang,J., Nie,S., Zhao,J., Batley,J. and Edwards,D. (2024) Plant pangenomics, current 

practice and future direction. Agriculture Communications , 2, 100039. 

5. Wei,C., Gao,L., Xiao,R., Wang,Y., Chen,B., Zou,W., Li,J., Mace,E., Jordan,D. and Tao,Y. (2024) 

Complete telomere‐to‐telomere assemblies of two sorghum genomes to guide 

biological discovery. iMeta , 3, e193. 

6. Liu,H., Liu,X., Zou,G., Zheng,X., Zheng,T., Lyu,H., Lou,Q. and Chen,H. (2025) The complete 

telomere -to -telomere genome assembly of Lablab purpureus (L.) Sweet. Sci Data , 12 ,

1785. 

7. Shen,L., Yi,C., Liu,Y., Han,F. and Feng,J. (2025) Two complete telomere -to -telomere genome 

assemblies of Medicago reveal the landscape and evolution of its centromeres. 

Molecular Plant , 18 , 1409 –1412. 

8. Wang,K., Jin,J., Wang,J., Wang,X., Sun,J., Meng,D., Wang,X., Wang,Y. and Guo,L. (2024) The 

complete telomere -to -telomere genome assembly of lettuce. Plant Communications ,

5, 101011. 

9. Guetta,M., Avidan,N., Kariti,H., Davis,L., Shemer,R., Elliot,E. and Kaplan,N. (2024) Fast Low -

Input Efficient Hi -C. Bio Rx iv, 10 .1101/2024.08.28.609956. 

10. Parker,S.M., Davis,E.S. and Phanstiel,D.H. (2023) Guiding the design of well -powered Hi -C

experiments to detect differential loops. Bioinformatics Advances , 3, vbad152. 

11. Yardımcı,G.G., Ozadam,H., Sauria,M.E.G., Ursu,O., Yan,K. -K., Yang,T., Chakraborty,A., 

Kaul,A., Lajoie,B.R., Song,F., et al. (2019) Measuring the reproducibility and quality of 

Hi -C data. Genome Biol , 20 , 57. 

12. Alonge,M., Soyk,S., Ramakrishnan,S., Wang,X., Goodwin,S., Sedlazeck,F.J., Lippman,Z.B. 

and Schatz,M.C. (2019) RaGOO: fast and accurate reference -guided scaffolding of 

draft genomes. Genome Biol , 20 , 224. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

13. Yamaguchi,K., Kadota,M., Nishimura,O., Ohishi,Y., Naito,Y. and Kuraku,S. (2021) Technical 

considerations in Hi‐C scaffolding and evaluation of chromosome‐scale genome 

assemblies. Molecular Ecology , 30 , 5923 –5934. 

14. Lukyanchikova,V., Brusentsov,I.I., Karagodin,D.A., Sharakhova,M.V. and Sharakhov,I.V. 

(2025) Protocol for Hi -C-based identification of chromosomal inversions in 

mosquitoes. STAR Protocols , 6, 104087. 

15. Lischer,H.E.L. and Shimizu,K.K. (2017) Reference -guided de novo assembly approach 

improves genome reconstruction for related species. BMC Bioinformatics , 18 , 474. 

16. Ballouz,S., Dobin,A. and Gillis,J.A. (2019) Is it time to change the reference genome? 

Genome Biol , 20 , 159. 

17. Du,Z. -Z., He,J. -B. and Jiao,W. -B. (2025) Plant graph -based pangenomics: techniques, 

applications, and challenges. aBIOTECH , 6, 361 –376. 

18. Alonge,M., Lebeigle,L., Kirsche,M., Jenike,K., Ou,S., Aganezov,S., Wang,X., Lippman,Z.B., 

Schatz,M.C. and Soyk,S. (2022) Automated assembly scaffolding using RagTag 

elevates a new tomato system for high -throughput genome editing. Genome Biol , 23 ,

258. 

19. Chen,K. -T., Liu,C. -L., Huang,S. -H., Shen,H. -T., Shieh,Y. -K., Chiu,H. -T. and Lu,C.L. (2018) 

CSAR: a contig scaffolding tool using algebraic rearrangements. Bioinformatics , 34 ,

109 –111. 

20. Kolmogorov,M., Raney,B., Paten,B. and Pham,S. (2014) Ragout —a reference -assisted 

assembly tool for bacterial genomes. Bioinformatics , 30 , i302 –i309. 

21. Vezzi,F., Cattonaro,F. and Policriti,A. (2011) e -RGA: enhanced Reference Guided Assembly 

of Complex Genomes. EMBnet j. , 17 , 46. 

22. Gordon,D., Huddleston,J., Chaisson,M.J.P., Hill,C.M., Kronenberg,Z.N., Munson,K.M., 

Malig,M., Raja,A., Fiddes,I., Hillier,L.W., et al. (2016) Long -read sequence assembly of 

the gorilla genome. Science , 352 , aae0344. 

23. Schneeberger,K., Ossowski,S., Ott,F., Klein,J.D., Wang,X., Lanz,C., Smith,L.M., Cao,J., Fitz,J., 

Warthmann,N., et al. (2011) Reference -guided assembly of four diverse Arabidopsis 

thaliana genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. , 108 , 10249 –10254. 

24. Ekblom,R. and Wolf,J.B.W. (2014) A field guide to whole‐genome sequencing, assembly 

and annotation. Evolutionary Applications , 7, 1026 –1042. 

25. Chen,K. -T., Shen,H. -T. and Lu,C.L. (2018) Multi -CSAR: a multiple reference -based contig 

scaffolder using algebraic rearrangements. BMC Syst Biol , 12 , 139. 

26. Coombe,L., Nikolić,V., Chu,J., Birol,I. and Warren,R.L. (2020) ntJoin: Fast and lightweight 

assembly -guided scaffolding using minimizer graphs. Bioinformatics , 36 , 3885 –3887. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

27. Armstrong,J., Hickey,G., Diekhans,M., Fiddes,I.T., Novak,A.M., Deran,A., Fang,Q., Xie,D., 

Feng,S., Stiller,J., et al. (2020) Progressive Cactus is a multiple -genome aligner for the 

thousand -genome era. Nature , 587 , 246 –251. 

28. Schreiber,M., Jayakodi,M., Stein,N. and Mascher,M. (2024) Plant pangenomes for crop 

improvement, biodiversity and evolution. Nat Rev Genet , 25 , 563 –577. 

29. Brunner,S., Fengler,K., Morgante,M., Tingey,S. and Rafalski,A. (2005) Evolution of DNA 

Sequence Nonhomologies among Maize Inbreds. The Plant Cell , 17 , 343 –360. 

30. Sirén,J., Eskandar,P., Ungaro,M.T., Hickey,G., Eizenga,J.M., Novak,A.M., Chang,X., Chang,P. -

C., Kolmogorov,M., Carroll,A., et al. (2024) Personalized pangenome references. Nat 

Methods , 21 , 2017 –2023. 

31. Cheng,H., Concepcion,G.T., Feng,X., Zhang,H. and Li,H. (2021) Haplotype -resolved de 

novo assembly using phased assembly graphs with hifiasm. Nat Methods , 18 , 170 –

175. 

32. Koren,S., Walenz,B.P., Berlin,K., Miller,J.R., Bergman,N.H. and Phillippy,A.M. (2017) Canu: 

scalable and accurate long -read assembly via adaptive k -mer weighting and repeat 

separation. Genome Res. , 27 , 722 –736. 

33. Wood,D.E., Lu,J. and Langmead,B. (2019) Improved metagenomic analysis with Kraken 2. 

Genome Biol , 20 , 257. 

34. Shen,W. and Ren,H. (2021) TaxonKit: A practical and efficient NCBI taxonomy toolkit. 

Journal of Genetics and Genomics , 48 , 844 –850. 

35. Camacho,C., Coulouris,G., Avagyan,V., Ma,N., Papadopoulos,J., Bealer,K. and Madden,T.L. 

(2009) BLAST+: architecture and applications. BMC Bioinform , 10 , 421. 

36. Sirén,J. and Paten,B. (2022) GBZ file format for pangenome graphs. Bioinformatics , 38 ,

5012 –5018. 

37. Hickey,G., Monlong,J., Ebler,J., Novak,A.M., Eizenga,J.M., Gao,Y., Human Pangenome 

Reference Consortium, Abel,H.J., Antonacci -Fulton,L.L., Asri,M., et al. (2024) 

Pangenome graph construction from genome alignments with Minigraph -Cactus. Nat 

Biotechnol , 42 , 663 –673. 

38. Kokot,M., Długosz,M. and Deorowicz,S. (2017) KMC 3: counting and manipulating k -mer 

statistics. Bioinformatics , 33 , 2759 –2761. 

39. Dufresne,Y., Lemane,T., Marijon,P., Peterlongo,P., Rahman,A., Kokot,M., Medvedev,P., 

Deorowicz,S. and Chikhi,R. (2022) The K -mer File Format: a standardized and compact 

disk representation of sets of k -mers. Bioinformatics , 38 , 4423 –4425. 

40. Li,H. (2018) Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics , 34 ,

3094 –3100. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

41. Danecek,P., Bonfield,J.K., Liddle,J., Marshall,J., Ohan,V., Pollard,M.O., Whitwham,A., 

Keane,T., McCarthy,S.A., Davies,R.M., et al. (2021) Twelve years of SAMtools and 

BCFtools. GigaScience , 10 , giab008. 

42. Diehl,A. and Boyle,A. (2025) Fast and Accurate Draft Genome Patching with GPatch. 

Bio Rx iv, 10.1101/2025.05.22.655567. 

43. Li,K., Xu,P., Wang,J., Yi,X. and Jiao,Y. (2023) Identification of errors in draft genome 

assemblies at single -nucleotide resolution for quality assessment and improvement. 

Nat Commun , 14 , 6556. 

44. Chen,Y., Zhang,Y., Wang,A.Y., Gao,M. and Chong,Z. (2021) Accurate long -read de novo 

assembly evaluation with Inspector. Genome Biol , 22 , 312. 

45. Guo,Y., Song,Y., Jiang,L., Chen,Y., Ceccarelli,M., Gao,M. and Chong,Z. (2025) A detailed 

guide to assessing genome assembly based on long -read sequencing data using 

Inspector. Nat Protoc , 20 , 2845 –2864. 

46. Sadasivan,H., Maric,M., Dawson,E., Iyer,V., Israeli,J. and Narayanasamy,S. (2023) 

Accelerating Minimap2 for Accurate Long Read Alignment on GPUs. J Biotechnol 

Biomed , 06 .

47. Marçais,G., Delcher,A.L., Phillippy,A.M., Coston,R., Salzberg,S.L. and Zimin,A. (2018) 

MUMmer4: A fast and versatile genome alignment system. PLoS Comput Biol , 14 ,

e1005944. 

48. Xu,M., Guo,L., Gu,S., Wang,O., Zhang,R., Peters,B.A., Fan,G., Liu,X., Xu,X., Deng,L., et al. 

(2020) TGS -GapCloser: A fast and accurate gap closer for large genomes with low 

coverage of error -prone long reads. GigaScience , 9, giaa094. 

49. Formenti,G., Abueg,L., Brajuka,A., Brajuka,N., Gallardo -Alba,C., Giani,A., Fedrigo,O. and 

Jarvis,E.D. (2022) Gfastats: conversion, evaluation and manipulation of genome 

sequences using assembly graphs. Bioinformatics , 38 , 4214 –4216. 

50. Simão,F.A., Waterhouse,R.M., Ioannidis,P., Kriventseva,E.V. and Zdobnov,E.M. (2015) 

BUSCO: assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single -copy 

orthologs. Bioinformatics , 31 , 3210 –3212. 

51. Wlodzimierz,P., Rabanal,F.A., Burns,R., Naish,M., Primetis,E., Scott,A., Mandáková,T., 

Gorringe,N., Tock,A.J., Holland,D., et al. (2023) Cycles of satellite and transposon 

evolution in Arabidopsis centromeres. Nature , 618 , 557 –565. 

52. Fang,X., Zhou,L. and Lin,Z. (2025) A high -quality chromosome -scale genome assembly of 

the wild sorghum (Sorghum virgatum). Sci Data , 12 , 1593. 

53. Espina,M.J.C., Lovell,J.T., Jenkins,J., Shu,S., Sreedasyam,A., Jordan,B.D., Webber,J., Boston,L., 

Brůna,T., Talag,J., et al. (2024) Assembly, comparative analysis, and utilization of a 

single haplotype reference genome for soybean. The Plant Journal , 120 , 1221 –1235. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

54. Jayakodi,M., Lu,Q., Pidon,H., Rabanus -Wallace,M.T., Bayer,M., Lux,T., Guo,Y., Jaegle,B., 

Badea,A., Bekele,W., et al. (2024) Structural variation in the pangenome of wild and 

domesticated barley. Nature , 636 , 654 –662. 

55. Bao,J., Zhang,H., Wang,F., Li,L., Zhu,X., Xu,J., Wang,Y., Liu,Z., Zhai,G., Xu,H., et al. (2024) 

Telomere -to -telomere genome assemblies of two Chinese Baijiu -brewing sorghum 

landraces. Plant Communications , 5, 100933. 

56. Li,J., Wang,L., Bible,P.W., Tu,W., Zheng,J., Jin,P., Liu,Y., Du,J., Zheng,J., Wang,Y. -H., et al. 

(2023) A chromosome -scale genome sequence of sudangrass (Sorghum sudanense) 

highlights the genome evolution and regulation of dhurrin biosynthesis. Theor Appl 

Genet , 136 , 60. 

57. Li,M., Chen,C., Wang,H., Qin,H., Hou,S., Yang,X., Jian,J., Gao,P., Liu,M. and Mu,Z. (2024) 

Telomere -to -telomere genome assembly of sorghum. Sci Data , 11 , 835. 

58. Morris,G.P., Harder,A.M., Healey,A.L., McLaughlin,C.M., Rice,B.R., Cruet -Burgos,C., 

Jenkins,J.W., Rifkin,J., Shu,S., Spiekerman,J.J., et al. (2025) Developing future resilience 

from signatures of adaptation across the sorghum pangenome. Bio Rx iv,

10.1101/2025.08.01.667986. 

59. Huang,Y., Koo,D. -H., Mao,Y., Herman,E.M., Zhang,J. and Schmidt,M.A. (2024) A complete 

reference genome for the soybean cv. Jack. Plant Communications , 5, 100765. 

60. Shen,Y., Du,H., Liu,Y., Ni,L., Wang,Z., Liang,C. and Tian,Z. (2019) Update soybean 

Zhonghuang 13 genome to a golden reference. Sci. China Life Sci. , 62 , 1257 –1260. 

61. Molinari,M.D.C., Fuganti -Pagliarini,R., Yu,Y., Florentino,L.H., Mertz -Henning,L.M., Lima,R.N., 

Bittencourt,D.M.D.C., Freire,M.O. and Rech,E. (2023) Exploring the Proteomic Profile of 

Soybean Bran: Unlocking the Potential for Improving Protein Quality a nd Quantity. 

Plants , 12 , 2704. 

62. Chu,J.S. -C., Peng,B., Tang,K., Yi,X., Zhou,H., Wang,H., Li,G., Leng,J., Chen,N. and Feng,X. 

(2021) Eight soybean reference genome resources from varying latitudes and 

agronomic traits. Sci Data , 8, 164. 

63. Jia,J., Ji,R., Li,Z., Yu,Y., Nakano,M., Long,Y., Feng,L., Qin,C., Lu,D., Zhan,J., et al. (2020) 

Soybean DICER -LIKE2 Regulates Seed Coat Color via Production of Primary 22 -

Nucleotide Small Interfering RNAs from Long Inverted Repeats. Plant Cell , 32 , 3662 –

3673. 

64. Wang,W., Chen,L., Fengler,K., Bolar,J., Llaca,V., Wang,X., Clark,C.B., Fleury,T.J., Myrvold,J., 

Oneal,D., et al. (2021) A giant NLR gene confers broad -spectrum resistance to 

Phytophthora sojae in soybean. Nat Commun , 12 , 6263. 

65. Garg,V., Dudchenko,O., Wang,J., Khan,A.W., Gupta,S., Kaur,P., Han,K., Saxena,R.K., 

Kale,S.M., Pham,M., et al. (2022) Chromosome -length genome assemblies of six 

legume species provide insights into genome organization, evolution, and agronomic 

traits for crop improvement. Journal of Advanced Research , 42 , 315 –329. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

66. Yano,R., Li,F., Hiraga,S., Takeshima,R., Kobayashi,M., Toda,K., Umehara,Y., Kajiya -

Kanegae,H., Iwata,H., Kaga,A., et al. (2025) The genomic landscape of gene -level 

structural variations in Japanese and global soybean Glycine max cultivars. Nat Genet ,

57 , 973 –985. 

67. Wang,F., Bao,J., Zhang,H., Zhai,G., Song,T., Liu,Z., Han,Y., Yu,F., Zou,G. and Zhu,Y. (2025) A 

telomere -to -telomere genome assembly of Chinese grain sorghum 654. Sci Data , 12 ,

460. 

68. Mascher,M., Wicker,T., Jenkins,J., Plott,C., Lux,T., Koh,C.S., Ens,J., Gundlach,H., Boston,L.B., 

Tulpová,Z., et al. (2021) Long -read sequence assembly: a technical evaluation in 

barley. The Plant Cell , 33 , 1888 –1906. 

69. Cheng,C., Krishnakumar,V., Chan,A.P., Thibaud‐Nissen,F., Schobel,S. and Town,C.D. (2017) 

Araport11: a complete reannotation of the Arabidopsis thaliana reference genome. 

The Plant Journal , 89 , 789 –804. 

70. Shen,W., Sipos,B. and Zhao,L. (2024) SeqKit2: A Swiss army knife for sequence and 

alignment processing. iMeta , 3, e191. 

71. Saski,C., Lee,S. -B., Fjellheim,S., Guda,C., Jansen,R.K., Luo,H., Tomkins,J., Rognli,O.A., 

Daniell,H. and Clarke,J.L. (2007) Complete chloroplast genome sequences of 

Hordeum vulgare, Sorghum bicolor and Agrostis stolonifera, and comparative 

analyses wit h other grass genomes. Theor Appl Genet , 115 , 571 –590. 

72. Robinson,J.T., Thorvaldsdóttir,H., Winckler,W., Guttman,M., Lander,E.S., Getz,G. and 

Mesirov,J.P. (2011) Integrative genomics viewer. Nat Biotechnol , 29 , 24 –26. 

73. Ren,Y., Xia,H., Lu,L. and Zhao,G. (2021) Characterization of the complete chloroplast 

genome of Hordeum vulgare L. var. trifurcatum with phylogenetic analysis. 

Mitochondrial DNA Part B , 6, 1852 –1854. 

74. Hisano,H., Tsujimura,M., Yoshida,H., Terachi,T. and Sato,K. (2016) Mitochondrial genome 

sequences from wild and cultivated barley (Hordeum vulgare). BMC Genomics , 17 ,

824. 

75. Ondov,B.D., Treangen,T.J., Melsted,P., Mallonee,A.B., Bergman,N.H., Koren,S. and 

Phillippy,A.M. (2016) Mash: fast genome and metagenome distance estimation using 

MinHash. Genome Biol , 17 , 132. 

76. Paradis,E. and Schliep,K. (2019) ape 5.0: an environment for modern phylogenetics and 

evolutionary analyses in R. Bioinformatics , 35 , 526 –528. 

77. Yu,G., Smith,D.K., Zhu,H., Guan,Y. and Lam,T.T. (2017) GGTREE : an R package for 

visualization and annotation of phylogenetic trees with their covariates and other 

associated data. Methods Ecol Evol , 8, 28 –36. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.17.712436 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

78. Henglin,M., Ghareghani,M., Harvey,W.T., Porubsky,D., Koren,S., Eichler,E.E., Ebert,P. and 

Marschall,T. (2024) Graphasing: phasing diploid genome assembly graphs with 

single -cell strand sequencing. Genome Biol , 25 , 265. 

79. Salzberg,S.L., Phillippy,A.M., Zimin,A., Puiu,D., Magoc,T., Koren,S., Treangen,T.J., 

Schatz,M.C., Delcher,A.L., Roberts,M., et al. (2012) GAGE: A critical evaluation of 

genome assemblies and assembly algorithms. Genome Res. , 22 , 557 –567. 

80. Laurin -Lemay,S., Brinkmann,H. and Philippe,H. (2012) Origin of land plants revisited in the 

light of sequence contamination and missing data. Current Biology , 22 , R593 –R594. 

81. Koutsovoulos,G., Kumar,S., Laetsch,D.R., Stevens,L., Daub,J., Conlon,C., Maroon,H., 

Thomas,F., Aboobaker,A.A. and Blaxter,M. (2016) No evidence for extensive horizontal 

gene transfer in the genome of the tardigrade Hypsibius dujardini . Proc. Natl. Acad. 

Sci. U.S.A. , 113 , 5053 –5058. 

82. Astashyn,A., Tvedte,E.S., Sweeney,D., Sapojnikov,V., Bouk,N., Joukov,V., Mozes,E., 

Strope,P.K., Sylla,P.M., Wagner,L., et al. (2024) Rapid and sensitive detection of 

genome contamination at scale with FCS -GX. Genome Biol , 25 , 60. 

83. Jing,J., Reed,J., Huang,J., Hu,X., Clarke,V., Edington,J., Housman,D., Anantharaman,T.S., 

Huff,E.J., Mishra,B., et al. (1998) Automated high resolution optical mapping using 

arrayed, fluid -fixed DNA molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. , 95 , 8046 –8051. 

84. Lieberman -Aiden,E., Van Berkum,N.L., Williams,L., Imakaev,M., Ragoczy,T., Telling,A., 

Amit,I., Lajoie,B.R., Sabo,P.J., Dorschner,M.O., et al. (2009) Comprehensive Mapping of 

Long -Range Interactions Reveals Folding Principles of the Human Genome. Science ,

326 , 289 –293. 

85. Jiao,W. -B., Accinelli,G.G., Hartwig,B., Kiefer,C., Baker,D., Severing,E., Willing,E. -M., 

Piednoel,M., Woetzel,S., Madrid -Herrero,E., et al. (2017) Improving and correcting the 

contiguity of long -read genome assemblies of three plant species using optical 

mapping and chromosome conformation capture data. Genome Res. , 27 , 778 –786.