Title: Hakken: Predicting future discoveries to fill the gaps in today's knowledge

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.04494v1

Published Time: Mon, 07 Sep 2026 00:15:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 66

Markdown Content:
# Hakken: Predicting future discoveries to fill the gaps in today’s knowledge 

Tarek R. Besold 1* , Uchenna Akujuobi 1, Pablo Sanchez 1,Alessandra Toniato 2, Kana Maruyama 3, Jihun Choi 3,Samy Badreddine 1, Frederick Gifford 4, Daniel Evans-Yamamoto 6,Sucheendra K. Palaniappan 6, Miquel Ferrer 1, Kae Nagano 3,Iris Rossell 1, Tom Joy 1, Hatem ElShazly 1, Chrysa Iliopoulou 1,Christoph Wehner 1, Thiviyan Thanapalasingam 1, Susana Nunes 1,Pedro G. Cotovio 1, Peter Wurman 5, Peter Stone 5,Hiroaki Kitano 3,6,7 , Michael Spranger 3

> 1*

SonyAI, Barcelona, Spain. 

> 2

SonyAI, Zurich, Switzerland. 

> 3

SonyAI, Tokyo, Japan. 

> 4

SonyAI, London, UK. 

> 5

SonyAI, New York, NY, USA. 

> 6

The Systems Biology Institute, Tokyo, Japan. 

> 7

Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology (OIST), Okinawa, Japan. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): tarek.besold@gmail.com; 

Abstract 

We present Hakken, a domain-agnostic prediction and explanation system per-forming knowledge prediction , i.e., growing scientific knowledge by establishing novel relationships, ones that are not limited to the deductive hull of previous knowledge. Hakken uses a transformer-based prediction model built on temporal sequences of knowledge graphs extracted from vast bodies of research publica-tions, fused with an LLM’s semantic knowledge, to predict the presence and define the type of as-yet undocumented relationships between scientific concepts. It then calls a model-agnostic explanation framework to provide accompanying information for each prediction that allows scientists to evaluate the suggested new relationships. While general purpose, we demonstrate Hakken’s practical capabilities by applying it to the biomedical domain. There, Hakken’s prediction 

1arXiv:2609.04494v1 [cs.LG] 3 Sep 2026 model establishes a new benchmark for time-aware multi-label relation predic-tion, and we show that the model’s outputs stay coherent and informative over extended time spans in historic data. In addition, we scored 1.5 million above-confidence-threshold hypotheses related to aging, qualitatively validated batches of these predictions with biologists and progressed three of them for empirical validation in wet-lab. Two predictions with potentially significant impact in the context of drug discovery and repurposing were confirmed, introducing previously undocumented interactions between TP53 and BAMBI, and between RAF1 and TNF, to biomedical science.  

> Keywords: Knowledge Prediction, Hypothesis Generation, Literature-Based Discovery, Explainability, Biomedical Science

# 1 Introduction 

One of the foundational principles of science is “standing on the shoulders of giants”— building on past discoveries to make new ones. For some time, this principle has been at risk: Scientific knowledge is being produced at unprecedented and ever-increasing speeds [1], and individual researchers are practically unable to stay abreast of all potentially relevant developments in their fields. Additionally, alongside the growth and fragmentation of the knowledge base, the individual fragments themselves are becoming more complex, increasingly pushing the mental limits of scientists who may struggle to comprehend overly intricate sets of facts, and who may be more subject to biases and preconceptions in their assessment of novel insights. In contrast, from an AI perspective the exponentially growing number of publications offers a clear oppor-tunity: The vast body of expert-reviewed research constitutes an evolving collection of highest-quality data concerning the governing laws of our physical world and the relationships between entities within it. Technologies like Literature Based Discovery (LBD) [2], and more recently generative AI [3], have been deployed to help researchers handle the double-challenge posed by the growing volume and complexity of scientific knowledge, with varying but notable success. Going beyond these methods, we introduce Hakken (named after the Japanese noun for “discovery” or “finding”), an AI prediction and explanation system that uses the knowledge stored in research literature to predict novel knowledge in the form of as yet unpublished relationships between scientific concepts. In doing knowledge prediction, Hakken takes the next step past current methods that extract, simplify and collate existing knowledge for researchers, or suggest unidentified connections from within the deductive closure of pre-existing knowledge. Instead, due to its predictive nature, Hakken is closer in spirit to scientific AI tools like AlphaFold [4] or GNoME [5]. Its output is a vast new dataset of novel predicted scientific relationships, many of them not inferrable based on today’s state of the literature alone, all of them specific in the subject, the object, and the precise type of the relationship. Each prediction comes with a confidence score, representing the counterfactual probability that it could already exist in the literature given everything else that is known—i.e., the weight of evidence in favor of the hypothesis. Hakken additionally delivers an explainability 2function for researchers that identifies small sets of known facts which help reveal the mechanisms underlying a prediction and the existing knowledge that supports it. This information helps to build confidence in the machine-generated insights and facilitates an informed decision to progress to validation studies. While domain-general in the underlying models, we concretely developed and tested Hakken for the biomedical domain. We benchmarked its prediction model against alternative approaches on the same prediction task, and evaluated its perfor-mance against historic biomedical literature data. Additionally, we validated Hakken’s practical value in a collaborative setting with biomedical researchers, going through a full discovery cycle from hypothesis definition to wet-lab validation. We discovered and confirmed two previously undocumented biomedical facts in the form of a gene-gene interaction between TP53 and BAMBI, and an enzyme-gene interaction between RAF1 and TNF. In the following, we first introduce Hakken’s prediction model THiGERLLM (Tem-poral Hierarchical Graph-based Encoder Representation with LLM), the first approach that predicts future relation labels in a multi-label setting as the discovery target, models temporal evolution via a temporal Graph Neural Network [6], fuses an LLM’s semantic knowledge with the graph structure, and is successfully applied to biomedical knowledge prediction. We then describe PHELInE (Predicted Hypothesis Elucidation with Literature-Inferred Explanations), a novel model-agnostic explanation framework we deploy within Hakken to provide the already mentioned knowledge-graph infor-mation for THiGERLLM ’s predictions. We continue with the results of the different benchmarks and a summary of the co-discovery process with biomedical researchers, before discussing the major opportunities that lie ahead on the path that Hakken opens. 

# 2 Predicting novel relationships with THiGERLLM 

Our unified temporal graph and language model THiGERLLM addresses literature-based knowledge prediction as a multi-label relation prediction task for an entity pair ( s, o ) in a scientific-literature knowledge graph. As a simple example from the biomedical domain, s may be a drug, such as Mefloquine, and o a disease, such as malaria. One possible relation type r could indicate that the drug prevents the disease, although multiple relation types may hold for the same pair. The model then asks which biomedical relations may hold between them. In order to formally define the problem, we have to introduce some notation. Let 

V denote the set of entities (graph nodes) and R = 1 , . . . , C the set of relation types. The space of all possible triples is defined as Ω := V × R × V . A knowledge graph is represented as G = ( V, R, F), where each fact ( s, r, o ) ∈ F ⊆ Ω consists of a subject entity s ∈ V , an object entity o ∈ V , and a directed relation r ∈ R . We consider a temporal knowledge graph represented as a sequence of T graph snapshots G(t) =(V, R(t), F(t)) with t ∈ { 1, . . . , T }, where F(t) ⊆ Ω denotes the set of triples observed within (or up to) time window t and R(t) ⊆ R . Given an entity pair ( s, o ) ∈ V × V ,the task is to predict the set of relations that hold between them, treating the pair as undirected so that ( s, o ) and ( o, s ) yield the same predictions. We formulate this as a 3Temporal Knowledge Graph   

> G₁ G₂

… G_T Entity pair (u, v)  

> + neighbourhood across T snapshots

Textual Context     

> "Entity [E1] u has been observed.... X1 to interact with [E2] v in …"

Graph Branch 

Hierarchical Graph Transformer     

> Temporal embeddings →Hierarchical merge →Global pair embedding + Contrastive negative sampling + Label embeddings
> z_pos
> entity pair embdding
> z_neg
> negative sample
> z_temporal
> temporal embeddings
> E_rel
> label embedding

Graph → LLM Bridge   

> stop-gradient (detach)
> Pair Projector
> Linear(D_g →D_llm) + RMSNorm
> Temporal Mapper
> Mapping the temporal embeddings to text space via Adaptive Pooling + σ-Gate

Language Model Branch            

> Input Embedding Assembly
> [ τ₁ τ₂ …τ_M | ⟨pair ⟩| w₁ w₂ ⋯[E1] …[E2] …]
> graph pre fi xtext tokens

Decoder LLM 

> Context update via Causal Self-Attention
> Entity Marker Pooling
> (h_[E1] + h_[E2]) / 2
> h_pooled
> Contexr representation

Label History Mechanism 

> Discovery Snapshot
> labels known before time τ
> History-Aware Cross-Attention
> Residual: logits + α · history_logits

Graph Scoring Head 

> z_pos · E_rel + history correction
> Graph Logits (B × L)
> Link Prediction (auxiliary)
> σ(score(z_pos)) − σ(score(z_neg))

Text Scoring Head 

> Linear(h_pooled) + α · history_logits(h_pooled, E_rel)
> Text Logits (B × L)

Joint Training & Inference   

> Inference: calibrated ensemble of both branches
> ŷ∈{0,1}^L
> Multi-label relation prediction

Fig. 1 : THiGERLLM for multi-label relation prediction. Given an entity pair (u, v ), the model combines a hierarchical temporal graph encoder with a language model. The graph branch summarizes structural and temporal evidence into compact graph embeddings, which are projected as prefix tokens and injected into the LLM together with publication-derived text. Graph-based and text-based label scores are then combined to produce the final predicted relations, and the resulting probabilities are calibrated to yield confidence scores. multi-label classification problem by associating each pair ( s, o ) with a binary relation vector yso ∈ { 0, 1}|R| where the r-th entry yso,r = 1 indicates that relation r holds between s and o; yso,r = 0 otherwise. Building on our previous model THiGER [7], which used temporal graph evidence alone to predict whether a relationship exists between two entities but not its type, 

THiGERLLM takes as input the ontology-based node representations of s and o, the temporally evolving graph around the pair, and text evidence from research publi-cations. The text evidence consists of sentences—sourced from articles available via PMC Open Access—mentioning each entity separately, without mentioning the other entity. The graph records how related findings accumulate over time, while the text provides scientific context from the literature. For each candidate relation r, the model outputs a prediction for the hypothesis (s, r, o ) together with a confidence score, which is subsequently calibrated [8, 9] to represent the estimated probability that the triple ( s, r, o ) is true, i.e., that predictions assigned probability p are correct with empirical frequency approximately p. This task is challenging because the evidence is structural, temporal, and semantic at the same time. To address this, THiGERLLM uses two branches that are learned jointly, as shown in Fig. 1: a graph branch that captures how evidence around ( s, o ) changes 4across time, and a language branch that interprets the pair using publication text. Each branch produces relation scores, and the final prediction combines them so that structural and semantic evidence can complement each other. To further refine these predictions, the model also uses label history, meaning relations already known for the pair up to the current time, as additional context. In the graph branch of THiGERLLM , entity representations are first constructed from learned node features together with available ontology and domain information, and are updated by neighborhood aggregation with a GraphSAGE-style encoder [10]. For the target pair, this yields a sequence of pair representations over time, which is processed by a temporal encoder [11, 12] to capture persistence, accumulation, and change in relational evidence. The encoder produces a global pair embedding for graph-based prediction and a short temporal sequence that preserves coarse temporal structure. These outputs are then projected into a small set of learned vectors that are prepended to the language-model input, allowing the language branch to use a compact summary of the graph and its temporal evolution. The language branch processes the publication text associated with each entity pair together with the prepended graph vectors. For the present study, we use Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 (released May 22, 2024) as the underlying large language model. For each entity, we retrieve 20 randomly sampled sentences that mention it individually from publications dated prior to the training-time cutoff. This constraint reduces the likelihood that predictions rely on future task-specific information and encourages the model to ground its outputs in the provided evidence. However, although it is very unlikely, because the model was pretrained on broad corpora with an unspecified cutoff date, residual temporal leakage cannot be fully excluded. When entity markers are available, the model uses the hidden states at the marked positions to build a text representation focused on the target pair; otherwise, it uses the final valid token representation. This text representation is used to produce relation scores from the text, while the graph embedding produces a separate set of relation scores from the graph alone. The two sets of scores are then combined in a label-wise ensemble so that the model can benefit from both sources, which may be informative in different situations. We also incorporate label history: relations already known for the pair up to the current time are encoded as contextual cues that adjust the candidate relation scores in both branches, helping the model account for prior knowledge and dependencies among relation labels. In this way, the model first learns from known examples during training and then applies what it has learned to new entity pairs during inference to predict relations. Training is designed for incomplete supervision, where observed labels are treated as positives but unobserved labels are not assumed to be negatives. We therefore use a class-balanced multi-label objective that downweights unlabeled entries, and the graph branch is additionally trained with an auxiliary ranking loss. During inference, the graph and text scores are combined in a label-wise ensemble and then calibrated on a held-out validation set before per-label thresholding. We report the resulting calibrated probabilities as confidence scores. Overall, THiGERLLM combines temporal graph evidence with publication text to produce more reliable knowledge predictions than either source alone. 5Explainability framework for THiGERLLM  

> G = knowledge graph · THiGERLLM_θ = scorer · f_φ* = trained surrogate · E = ordered set of (s,r,o) triples on path · G_E = subgraph with E, G
> ∖E = G minus E
> OFFLINE — trained once
> Training data: {(s,r,o)+, (s,r,o)−}
> scored by THiGERLLM_θ(s,r,o,G)
> Train GraphSAGE f_φ to mimic the scores of THiGERLLM:
> min_φ Σ ‖f_φ(s,r,o,G) − THiGERLLM_θ(s,r,o,G) ‖²

f_φ* (frozen 

surrogate)    

> ONLINE — for each new hypothesis
> Hypothesis (s,r,o):
> (TP53, AFFECTS_EXPRESSION_OF, BAMBI)
> Knowledge graph
> 1. Candidate generation
> Find candidate explanations that form paths of facts
> connecting the entities in the hypothesis
> 2. Query f_φ* — no retraining
> For each candidate E, query surrogate:
> f_φ*(s,r,o, G_E)
> sufficiency (path present)
> f_φ*(s,r,o, G ∖E)
> necessity (path removed)
> Surrogate is reused — no retraining for new hypotheses
> Scores per E_i
> 3. Influence scoring & reranking
> Sufficiency(E): f_φ*(s,r,o,G_E) Necessity(E): f_φ*(s,r,o,G) − f_φ*
> (s,r,o,G ∖E)
> Rank by influence; pick top diverse paths
> (TP53, RELATES_TO , Gastric cancer)
> (Gastric cancer, INCREASES_EXPRESSION_OF, BAMBI)
> query
> Model-agnostic: only needs THiGERLLM scores during training — no access to internal model weights
> (TP53, RELATES_TO , Gastric cancer)
> (Gastric cancer, INCREASES_EXPRESSION_OF, BAMBI)
> (TP53, PREVENTS, Malignant melanoma)
> (BAMBI, RELATES_TO, Malignant melanoma)
> (TP53, regulates, TGF-β)
> (TGF-β, regulates, BAMBI)
> ...
> E_1
> E_2
> E_3
> E_n
> (TP53, regulates, TGF-β)
> (TGF-β, regulates, BAMBI)
> Suff(E_2): 0.87
> Nec(E_1): 0.69

Fig. 2 : PHELInE providing explanations for THiGERLLM ’s predictions. Asurrogate model is trained once (offline) to approximate prediction scores of THiGER-LLM . At inference time (online), for each hypothesis—a candidate triple (subject, relation, object)—we enumerate relational paths in the knowledge graph that connect the entities. For each path, we query the surrogate on subgraphs with and without that path to compute sufficiency (how much the path supports the prediction) and necessity (how much removing it weakens the prediction). Paths are ranked by influ-ence and reranked by diversity to produce final explanations. 

# 3 Explaining novel relationships with PHELInE 

In scientific contexts, interpretability is essential as researchers must be able to assess how a prediction relates to existing knowledge. To address this challenge, we devel-oped PHELInE , a model-agnostic explanation framework (Figure 2) that explains relation predictions ( s, r, o ) on knowledge graphs through relational patterns, i.e., contextual subgraphs of facts. Specifically, PHELInE identifies small sets of related facts—typically forming multi-hop paths between subject and object—that signifi-cantly affect the model’s predicted score when present or removed. For the wet-lab validation experiments (Section 4.4), candidate explanations were restricted to short-est subject–object paths, which were typically 2–4 hops long. This design is motivated by the observation that knowledge is inherently structured as interconnected relation-ships rather than isolated facts [13], where relational patterns often capture known mechanisms (e.g., pathways, interactions, or functional associations) [14, 15] and allow researchers to assess whether predictions align with established domain knowledge. 

PHELInE interacts with the prediction model only through queries to its scoring function and therefore does not require access to model parameters or the training procedure. The framework comprises three main components: initial path-based candi-date explanation generation, subsequent surrogate-based pseudo-retraining to estimate 6prediction changes under graph perturbations, and final influence-based explanation scoring and reranking. The initial candidate-generation stage identifies candidate explanations within a constrained search space of facts. In practice, explanations are constructed as paths of length k connecting the entities involved in the predicted relationship. Candi-date paths are obtained by enumerating relational paths in the observed knowledge graph that connect the subject entity and object entity of the hypothesis. All triples occurring along these paths are collected as candidate explanatory facts. Such paths capture multi-hop relational patterns present in the knowledge graph and often reflect meaningful contextual relationships in scientific data. As a next step, evaluating the influence of a candidate explanation requires esti-mating how the prediction of the model would change if the explanation facts were added to or removed from the training graph. Directly retraining the prediction model for each candidate explanation would be computationally infeasible. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a pseudo-retraining procedure based on a surrogate model trained to approximate the scoring behaviour of the original predictor. The surro-gate learns to reproduce the scores produced by the original model while conditioning on the structure of the training graph. Once trained, it can efficiently estimate how predictions would change under hypothetical modifications to the graph, enabling rapid evaluation of candidate explanations without repeated retraining of the original model. In our implementation, the surrogate model is a GraphSAGE graph neural net-work [10] trained to predict the scores of the original predictive model. Once trained, it allows approximation of score changes for many candidate explanations simply by conditioning on different sets of facts. In a final scoring and reranking step, candidate explanations are evaluated accord-ing to how strongly they influence the predicted score of the hypothesis triple. A sufficiency score measures whether the triples in the explanation alone can reproduce a high prediction score. To compute this quantity, we evaluate the surrogate model on a graph containing only the candidate explanation triples and measure the resulting score for the hypothesis [16]. A necessity score measures how strongly the prediction deteriorates when the explanation triples are removed from the training graph. This is estimated by evaluating the surrogate model on the graph obtained by removing the candidate explanation from the training graph and measuring the resulting drop in the predicted score [16]. These two objectives capture complementary aspects of model behaviour: sufficiency identifies triples that independently support the prediction, whereas necessity identifies triples whose absence substantially weakens it. After computing these influence scores for all candidate explanations, the frame-work selects the highest-scoring candidates—according to the chosen score strategy— and applies a reranking step to produce the final explanations. The reranking prioritizes explanations corresponding to distinct relational paths, ensuring that the final explanations capture diverse reasoning patterns rather than multiple variants of the same path structure. By promoting explanations that involve different interme-diate entities and relations, this step encourages the discovery of multiple plausible mechanisms that could support the predicted relationship. 74 Evaluation in Biomedical Science 

In order to assess Hakken’s performance and practical usability and relevance, we chose to apply Hakken to research in biomedical science. This matches a general trend where AI models are increasingly demonstrating their potential in the domain [17–19]. 

4.1 Biomedical Data 

The primary dataset used for the evaluation of Hakken in biomedical science was made up of information derived from PMC Open Access (full text articles) and MEDLINE (titles and abstracts), together with data from a commercially licensed dataset. Ini-tially, the dataset contains 249 ,329 ,650 raw triples, where each triple consists of two entities and the directed relationship connecting them (see formal definition in Section 2). Each triple is also associated with a timestamp indicating the year in which the article from which the triple has been derived was published and other auxiliary infor-mation (e.g. the original text sentence where available from the Open Access content used, the publication source, etc.). Alongside these triples, ontology files were pro-vided that map each entity to one or more hierarchical domain descriptors, which we used to standardize entity domains and guide the subsequent data-cleaning steps (see Appendix E for details). The final cleaned dataset contains 254 ,806 entities and 7,127 ,960 triples across 23 relation types and 20 macro-domains. 

4.2 Model Benchmarking 

Using the biomedical data at our disposal, we evaluate THiGERLLM against a diverse set of baseline models for multi-label relation prediction under a temporally separated protocol designed to prevent training-time information leakage. We assess model performance on temporally held-out data, testing its ability to identify relations that emerge in later years. The selected baselines represent complementary model-ing paradigms: A random baseline assigning relationships randomly among candidate relation types, a structural knowledge-graph model based on ComplEx [20], k-nearest neighbors (kNN) over subject-object representations, a multi-label multi-layer per-ceptron (MLP) classifier, a rule-based multi-label classifier learning per-node label profiles and label-specific neighbor sets then scoring each label, a temporal graph-modeling baseline based on tNodeEmbed [21], and our previous model THiGER [7] that integrates temporal and structural signals for relational hypothesis ranking. Table 1 summarizes both classification-based and ranking-based metrics using a 2020 temporal cut-off. All relation instances represented as triples ( s, r, o ) first observed on or before 2020 are used for model training. Relation instances first observed after 2020 are reserved for evaluation. Models perform multi-label edge pre-diction by assigning one or more candidate relation types to a given subject–object entity pair. A predicted relation type is considered a true positive if the correspond-ing relation instance is first observed after 2020. Predictions not observed after 2020 are treated as negative instances for metric computation within the evaluation period. Appendix C reports further experiments, including a top-m analysis examining the ranking behavior under a fixed prediction budget. 8Overall, THiGERLLM consistently ranks among the best-performing models across the evaluated metrics. When focusing on weighted F1 or nDCG mean , our previous model THiGER pulls slightly ahead of THiGERLLM . Weighted F1 empha-sizes frequent relation types, while nDCG mean evaluates the quality of the predicted ranking. Together, these results suggest that THiGER performs particularly well on dominant relations and produces slightly sharper rankings of the most relevant can-didates. However, while still closely tracking THiGER on weighted F1 or nDCG mean ,the trend reverses for macro F1, where THiGERLLM achieves higher performance. Because macro metrics weight all relations equally, this indicates that THiGERLLM 

performs better on average across relation types. By additionally incorporating tex-tual information, our new model substantially improves macro recall while maintaining similar weighted precision, despite some reduction in macro precision. This indicates recovery of more correct triples across relation types—particularly benefiting less frequent relations—which explains the improvement in macro F1. When interpreting these results, it is important to consider the evaluation setting—and the application context—in a scientific domain. While recall depends on correctly predicted true positives, precision implicitly assumes that predicted nega-tives correspond to true negatives. In practice, many negatives correspond to hitherto unobserved—rather than truly false—facts, meaning that predictions counted as false positives may actually represent valid but not yet labeled ( s, r, o ) triples. Consequently, improvements in recall as shown by THiGERLLM are particularly meaningful, as they reflect the ability to recover true relations without relying on the completeness of nega-tive labels. We hypothesize that this improvement stems from the additional semantic information provided by the text component. Graph structure and temporal signals capture relational patterns and dynamics, in addition to which textual descriptions provide complementary background knowledge about entities and relations. Moreover, this information is particularly valuable when graph connectivity is sparse—common for rare relations—where textual context can help infer plausible connections that are weakly supported by structural evidence alone. In science, rare relations often fall into at least one of three categories, corresponding to infrequently studied, novel, or quite specific types of interaction. For predicted scientific knowledge, novelty and specificity are strongly desirable properties, as is the ability for Hakken to also cover potentially understudied types of concept connections. This makes THiGERLLM ’s consistent performance across relation types a key asset regarding Hakken’s practical application value. 

4.3 Back-testing the Model on Historic Data 

Beyond strong performance on standard benchmarks, a temporal prediction model such as THiGERLLM must demonstrate practical scientific relevance. In particu-lar, it should not only generate plausible hypotheses from the knowledge available at a given point in time, but also maintain their validity as the time horizon extends—without degrading to random performance for more distant future predic-tions. In other words, meaningful signal should persist even as the evaluation window shifts further forward in time. To evaluate these capabilities, we simulate historical forecasting conditions by restricting the model to past knowledge and then testing 9Table 1 : Baseline comparison for time-aware multi-label relation prediction for a 2020 cut-off. All metrics are reported in percent to improve readability.                                                                

> Model Prec macro Rec macro F1,macro Prec wRec wF1,wnDCG mean
> Random 6.08 6.86 3.78 18.21 6.07 8.36 35.20 ComplEx 5.34 8.29 5.80 17.15 19.68 18.15 47.21 KNN 33.00 26.85 28.53 60.93 58.52 59.10 74.59 MLP 39.46 26.81 28.75 66.96 60.19 61.52 86.81 RuleBased 12.81 56.39 19.08 29.43 91 .08 42.22 78.98 TNodeEmbed 40.57 27.41 29.17 68.94 62.42 63.47 87.63 THiGER 60 .20 46.13 50.98 86 .15 71.66 77 .97 92 .19
> THiGERLLM 53.77 60 .72 51 .16 84.01 66.54 73.73 90.30

whether its proposed hypotheses remain meaningful over the following decade. To quantify this behavior, we evaluate the model using disjoint future time bins. For a given cutoff time tk, we partition the future into non-overlapping intervals such as (tk, t k + 2] , (tk + 2 , t k + 4] , . . . , (tk + 8 , t k + 10]. Within each interval, we compute recall as the fraction of relations that first appear in that time window and were correctly predicted using only information available up to tk. This provides a time-resolved view of predictive performance: early bins capture short-term, quickly testable hypotheses, while later bins reflect longer-term predictions that may depend on future advances. This separation allows us to distinguish between immediate and delayed validation of model-generated hypotheses. An important consequence of this setup is that recall is well-defined temporally, since we can identify when a true relation first appears in the literature and check whether it was predicted in advance. In contrast, precision becomes fundamentally ill-defined in this setting. While we can label true positives (relations later observed) and false negatives (relations missed by the model), we can-not reliably label false positives, as predictions that are not yet observed may simply correspond to discoveries that have not been made—or not yet published—within the evaluation window. For this reason, temporal recall and ranking-based metrics provide a more meaningful assessment of predictive performance in this context. In Fig. 3 (first line), we report the micro recall, where all relationships are treated equal, and analyze how recall evolves over time. Variation in this curve can arise from two fundamentally different sources. The first is real temporal effects, which are the primary object of interest, such as changes in the model’s ability to generalize across time, shifts in terminology, or entity drift. The second is dataset composition effects, which are artifacts caused by differences in the distribution or difficulty of relations across time periods, as well as interactions with decision thresholds. To de-couple these effects we also report the macro recall In Fig. 3 (middle line). Here the recall is first computed per relation type and then averaged. The decaying trend is clear, with a drop of 8%. This moderate decrease is consistent with the intuition that longer-term predictions are inherently more challenging, while still indicating substantial retention of predictive signal over time. In addition, we introduce a null baseline to answer a complementary question: how well would the model perform if scores for relation r came from the same overall 10 distribution, but were randomly assigned? This baseline preserves calibration and overall score behavior while removing any input–output relationship. We construct this baseline via random empirical sampling of prediction scores. Inputs, labels, and thresholds are kept fixed, but predicted scores are replaced with values drawn from the empirical distribution of all predictions that the model made around a certain relation type. Under this baseline, recall is substantially lower than the model, remaining around 0.24 in early bins and decreasing slightly in later bins. The gap between the model and the null baseline therefore reflects genuine predictive capability that persists across time, despite increasing difficulty in long-horizon prediction. We observe that interval recall curves are nearly identical when training the model on different knowledge cut-offs (e.g., 1990, 2000, or 2010). Specifically, while the absolute set of known relations changes across these regimes, the relative pattern of performance across forecasting horizons remains highly stable: short-term predictions are easier, long-term predictions are harder, and the rate of decline from early to late bins is very similar in all cases. This suggests that the underlying structure governing predictive difficulty is largely invariant over time. In other words, even as scientific knowledge grows and the graph becomes denser, the way in which predictability degrades with increasing temporal distance remains essentially unchanged. This indi-cates that we are not observing regime-specific behavior tied to a particular historical period, nor a systematic shift in model difficulty across decades, but rather a stable “decay profile” of predictability that persists across different snapshots of scientific knowledge. Finally, we analyze the stability of the model’s ranking using mean nDCG across time horizons. We observe that nDCG remains highly stable across cutoffs, horizons, and model variants. This indicates that the relative ordering of predicted hypotheses is largely preserved over time. In other words, even as recall may slightly decline, the model continues to prioritize the same relationships as most promising. This stability is critical for supporting sustained scientific exploration, where consistent prioritiza-tion matters as much as absolute accuracy. Taken together, these temporal analyses support the practical applicability of the model. The results suggest that the scientific literature encodes persistent structural constraints that make many future discover-ies predictable in advance, that the model generates hypotheses that remain coherent over time, and that it prioritizes them in a way that continues to be informative as new knowledge emerges over the following decade. 

4.4 Wet-lab Validation 

As a gold-standard evaluation of Hakken’s practical usefulness and the ability to materially contribute to the generation of new scientific knowledge, we worked with biomedical researchers and an independent Contract Research Organization (CRO) to undergo the full cycle from hypothesis generation to wet-lab validation. As our biomedical collaborators are experts in the area of aging-related genetics, to reduce the search space and retain biological relevance, we restricted Hakken’s pre-dictions to a curated subset of entities from that space. The corresponding selection process started from a compiled list of aging-relevant genes provided by biomedical experts and continues with the generation of 1,543,297 above-confidence-threshold 11 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 Micro Recall         

> 0.739 0.725 0.701 0.676 0.660 0.225 0.225 0.221 0.218 0.215 Sliding Window Micro Recall
> Model Random empirical scores

(a) Interval Micro Recall for training cutoff 1990. 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.2 0.4 0.6 Micro Recall         

> 0.746 0.730 0.711 0.700 0.685 0.209 0.204 0.200 0.198 0.195 Sliding Window Micro Recall
> Model Random empirical scores

(b) Interval Micro Recall for training cutoff 2000. 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.2 0.4 0.6 Micro Recall         

> 0.711 0.692 0.676 0.662 0.645 0.163 0.161 0.160 0.158 0.157 Sliding Window Micro Recall
> Model Random empirical scores

(c) Interval Micro Recall for training cutoff 2010. 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Macro Recall         

> 0.492 0.494 0.461 0.446 0.422 0.057 0.057 0.054 0.056 0.065 Sliding Window Macro Recall
> Model Random empirical scores

(d) Interval Macro Recall for training cutoff 1990. 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Macro Recall         

> 0.503 0.472 0.461 0.445 0.442 0.058 0.058 0.057 0.057 0.057 Sliding Window Macro Recall
> Model Random empirical scores

(e) Interval Macro Recall for training cutoff 2000. 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Macro Recall         

> 0.511 0.496 0.481 0.469 0.463 0.053 0.052 0.052 0.052 0.052 Sliding Window Macro Recall
> Model Random empirical scores

(f) Interval Macro Recall for training cutoff 2010. 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.986 0.987 0.988 0.989 nDCG  

> 0.989 0.987 0.985 0.985 0.987 Sliding Window nDCG

(g) Mean nDCG for training cutoff 1990. 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.983 0.984 0.985 nDCG 

> 0.986 0.984 0.983 0.983 0.985 Sliding Window nDCG

(h) Mean nDCG for training cutoff 2000. 2 4 6 8 10 Years After Training Cutoff 0.982 0.983 0.984 0.985 0.986 nDCG  

> 0.986 0.984 0.982 0.982 0.983 Sliding Window nDCG

(i) Mean nDCG for training cutoff 2010. 

Fig. 3 : Historic validation results for THiGERLLM . First row (a–c): Discovery cover-age across disjoint horizons. Each curve reports micro recall for new relations that first appear in each future window. Second row (d–e): Discovery coverage across disjoint horizons. Each curve reports macro recall for new relations that first appear in each future window. Third row (f–g): Stability of prioritization across disjoint horizons. Mean nDCG quantifies whether relations that first appear in a given future window concentrate near the top of the ranked list. hypotheses. Once hypotheses had been generated, a hypothesis-selection pipeline pro-cessed the raw predictions produced by THiGERLLM on the previously curated subset of nodes and yielded a refined list of mechanistically plausible hypotheses. Following completion of the pipeline, the hypotheses and PHELInE ’s corresponding explana-tions were shared with the biomedical experts who were then tasked to select three predictions for experimental validation based on their subjective assessment of the hypotheses’ interestingness and relevance to the research field. The following predicted 12 biomedical relationships were then submitted to the CRO for wet-lab validation: TP53 affects the expression of BAMBI which may link how TP53, the most commonly mutated gene in human cancer, increases cancer progression; RAF1 decreases the expression of TNF which could provide insights into cancer-associated inflammation, immune evasion, and targeted therapies; and SOAT1 affects the transcriptional activ-ity of STAT3 which would provide new insights into how lipid metabolism intersects with inflammation, cancer, and metabolic diseases. This first round of experimental evaluation found confirmatory evidence for two of the three hypotheses, introducing two previously undocumented gene-gene and enzyme-gene interactions to the body of biomedical knowledge. For the suggested effect of TP53 on the expression of BAMBI, a consistent increase across initial and confirmatory assay in BAMBI expression following P53 induction—coinciding with maximal P53 protein levels—provided validating evidence for the hypothesis of a functional relationship between P53 and BAMBI. Similarly, for the hypothesized decreasing influence of RAF1 on the expression of TNF, a consistent increase across initial and confirmatory assay in TNF mRNA expression following cell treatment with a RAF1-inhibitor—coinciding with increased ERK phosphorylation indicating RAF1 dimerization and transactivation—confirmed a functional relationship between RAF1 modulation and TNF regulation. Regarding the SOAT1-STAT3 hypothesis, the results from the hypothesis testing assays showed that stimulation of SOAT1 (via LDL load-ing of HepG2 cells) did not demonstrate an effect on STAT3 at the transcription level or STAT3 at the protein level. These findings, thus, failed to support the hypothesis of a potential link between SOAT1 activity and STAT3 expression or activation, at least within the chosen experimental design. The successful wet-lab validations of the relationships between TP53 and BAMBI, and between RAF1 and TNF, allow us to add two novel discoveries first suggested by Hakken to the body of biomedical knowledge. Both results have potential significant impact, particularly in the context of drug discovery and repurposing. Now that it has been confirmed that TP53 affects the expression of BAMBI, if future studies find that TP53 more specifically represses BAMBI, this could mean that P53 enhances TGF-β tumor-suppressive effects by reducing BAMBI’s inhibitory role. Loss of TP53— which is a common event in cancer—might, thus, lead to increased BAMBI expression, suppressing TGF-β signaling and promoting tumor progression. On the other hand, if TP53 activates BAMBI, this could suggest that P53 uses BAMBI to dampen excessive TGF-β activity, preventing fibrosis or metastasis. As regards the confirmed regulatory relationship from RAF1 to TNF expression, this could open new therapeutic avenues for cancer, autoimmune diseases, and inflammatory disorders. 

# 5 Discussion 

For Hakken to realize its full potential, it must be placed in the hands of researchers and integrated into their daily workflows. This requires delivering outputs in a clear, intuitive, and accessible way. To address this, we developed a Graphical User Inter-face (GUI) that enables researchers to: (1) create and search Hakken hypotheses using subject, object, or predicate inputs, and (2) test researcher-generated hypotheses by 13 reviewing confidence scores produced by Hakken. These hypotheses and confidence scores are supplemented with supporting evidence through PHELInE explanations. In addition, we incorporated LLM-based contextual predictions to identify existing papers likely to contain relevant information related to a given hypothesis. The GUI also allows researchers to apply search and prediction constraints, including prioritiz-ing recent literature (hot topics), older literature (more nascent research areas), and adjusting the preferred path length connecting subjects and objects in the knowl-edge graph (where longer paths may indicate less intuitive relationships). We provided biomedical researchers from seven academic and industry organizations with access to Hakken’s GUI (for licensing reasons utilizing a version of the system trained exclu-sively on the PubTator3 dataset [22]). The qualitative feedback was overwhelmingly positive, with users particularly highlighting the value of the explanatory evidence accompanying the hypotheses. In general, Hakken opens up new ways to practice science. On the one hand, the new body of predicted knowledge available through Hakken is a dataset with massive utility, one that can take researchers beyond existing knowledge. On the other hand, in addition to the value of the predictions themselves, the associated confidence scores offer potentially game-changing mechanisms to researchers. As a case study, we have explored Hakken’s potential in drug development, applying its scores as a “knowledge score”, to be used as a new means of filtering, ranking and progressing candidates (i.e., novel active substances) through the stages of discovery and development in preclinical research, alongside other mechanisms like ADMET scores [23]. While we recognize the boundaries of a score that indicates only how strongly a hypothesis is supported by the literature, researchers in the field confirmed that the highly cost-intensive space of drug development needs all the de-risking help it can get. Both THiGERLLM and PHELInE are not bound in their functioning to any particular area of science, but have intentionally been built to be domain-general. While extensively validating Hakken in the biomedical domain, we also prototyped Hakken’s application to agricultural science and to materials science among others. In agricultural science, operating on inputs extracted from 19th Century texts about market gardening, Hakken could contribute to the ideation of new opportunities for the small-scale, intensive and eco-friendly production of fruits and vegetables. In the case of materials science, Hakken could be used to suggest new chemical relationships. An immediate next step to further Hakken’s capabilities is to increase the expres-siveness of the knowledge representation in order to overcome Hakken’s current limitation to operating on concepts and their relationships only. Improvements could be achieved by incorporating quantitative and conditional information into the knowl-edge graph—and, ultimately, also into the predictions—representing, for instance, quantity ratios or environmental conditions required for a relationship to hold. More-over, at present Hakken only considers and represents the first occurrence of a fact in the available literature. This representation could be enriched with additional tempo-ral and evidential metadata, such as the number of supporting papers or sentences, the most recent observation year, and the frequency of occurrence over time. Incorpo-rating such signals could further improve the robustness and predictive performance of the system. Additionally, Hakken’s method of incorporating the temporal evolution of 14 literature points towards opportunities for deeper analysis of how science evolves rela-tionship by relationship, and how it might evolve in the future. Hakken currently does not reintroduce the concept of time in its output, predicting when a relationship might appear, and the possibility of doing this would be a valuable addition to the system’s capabilities. Relatedly, being able to forecast the impact within the field of a predicted relationship—measured, say, by the number of follow-up discoveries it unlocks—could alter the trajectory of entire scientific disciplines. Finally, another major expansion will be to complement Hakken’s knowledge-prediction with experimental-design gen-eration capabilities. Feedback from working scientists suggests that, while also aiding process efficiency, receiving a suggested experimental design will further augment the trustworthiness of the suggested discovery. We strongly believe in a future ecosystem of AI prediction tools that wield the vast body of published scientific knowledge in a fashion similar to Hakken. Hakken is in many ways complementary to LLM-based systems such as the hypothesis-generation focused HypoGeniC [24] and ResearchAgent [25], or to full-cycle systems such as AI Co-Scientist [26] or the AI Scientist [27]. LLMs often are trained on vast amounts— up to web-scale—of data of heterogeneous quality. Hakken uses a comparatively small amount of well-curated—literally peer-reviewed—data. LLMs often require almost prohibitively large amounts of compute for training, with a run taking weeks or months. THiGERLLM , in the setting described in this article, has been trained on a modest cluster comprised of two machines each equipped with 8 NVIDIA H100 80GB SXM5 GPUs and 960GB memory, with the duration of a run measured in days. Finally, larger LLMs still require high-end hardware for inference, whilst Hakken runs on commodity hardware. While this makes Hakken by itself the by far more accessi-ble approach as regards resources, we are convinced that major added value can be obtained when both paradigms are combined. AI Co-Scientist, for instance, employs a multi-agent architecture built upon Google’s Gemini 2.0 model with the intent to reproduce the scientific reasoning process. Scientists can input a research goal in nat-ural language for the system’s LLM agents to then summarize and synthesize prior literature and try to propose new hypotheses and protocols for validations. Without adding significant overhead in required resources, Hakken’s predicted knowledge and corresponding explanations can serve as additional input data, guiding LLM reason-ing with structured, interrogable information and expanding the reach of the system’s reasoning through predicted knowledge outside of the deductive closure of the input data. At the same time, Hakken’s confidence scores can provide a quantitative assess-ment of the degree to which existing knowledge supports LLM outputs, laying the foundations to counteract imprecision and hallucinations [28]. 

Acknowledgements. We want to thank Priyadarshini Kumari, Angel Hsing-Chi Hwang, Cliona O’Doherty, Jesus de la Fuente, Alessandro Lonardi, Laura Cabello, Carmen Martin Turrero, Donghee Choi, Anton Kratz, Ayako Yachie, Ernesto Jimenez-Ruiz, and Catia Pesquita for their input and support during different stages of Hakken’s development. We further want to thank Pharmagene Discovery Services Ltd. for the positive collaboration during the wet-lab validation of hypotheses. 15 Appendix A Open-Source Resources 

An open-source version of the Hakken infrastructure, including a prediction model trained exclusively on the NCBI’s open-access PubTator3 dataset [22] (similar to the variant used in the context of the qualitative user studies mentioned in Section 5 above), is available from https://github.com/SonyResearch/HakkenOSS. 

# Appendix B Temporal Hierarchical Graph-based Encoder Representation with LLM (THiGERLLM )

The following gives a detailed description of THiGERLLM (Temporal Hierarchical Graph-based Encoder Representation with LLM). 

B.1 Problem Setup 

B.1.1 Supervision as temporally indexed positive–unlabeled targets 

Each training instance is represented as (s, o, xso , tso ) (B1) where xso is the text context and tso ∈ { 0, . . . , T max }C stores the observed discovery time of each label. Here, tso,c = 0 indicates that label c has not been observed for the pair, whereas tso,c > 0 indicates that label c is known and was first observed at time 

tso,c . From this representation we derive the binary supervision signal 

yso,c = 1[tso,c > 0] . (B2) This formulation corresponds to a positive–unlabeled (PU) learning setting: observed labels constitute confirmed positives, while unobserved labels are treated as unlabeled rather than explicit negatives. For a query time τ , we additionally construct a label-history snapshot 

m(τ ) 

> so,c

= 1[tso,c > 0 ∧ tso,c ≤ τ ], (B3) which indicates which labels are already known at that time. which indicates whether label c has already been observed for the pair ( s, o ) by time τ . During training, τ is sampled per example; during evaluation, it is fixed according to the test protocol. 

B.1.2 Model outputs 

The model produces two sets of label scores: 

ℓtext  

> so

∈ RC , ℓgraph  

> so

∈ RC , (B4) 16 corresponding to the language branch and the graph branch, respectively. Both branches are trained jointly. At inference time, they are combined by a label-wise ensemble and subsequently calibrated to obtain probability estimates. 

B.1.3 Text tokens and graph tokens 

Let the LLM hidden size be d and the temporal-GNN hidden size be dg . A prompt is tokenized into a length-L token ID sequence x = ( x1, . . . , x L) that contains exactly one special placeholder token <htg> at index k, where k ∈ { 1, . . . , L }. At runtime, this placeholder is replaced by a global node-pair graph token Gso . The temporal graph token Tm ∈ Rd is then prepended to the text token, where Tm encodes information from the m-th temporal graph snapshot As a result, the sequence length increases to 

L′ = L + M. (B5) 

B.2 Model Overview 

Given a pair ( s, o ) and its optional textual context xso , the temporal graph encoder constructs a sequence of T pair embeddings {p(t) 

> so

}Tt=1 using GraphSAGE-style neighborhood aggregation over G(t) [10]. A hierarchical temporal Transformer then aggregates these T embeddings into (i) a global graph vector and (ii) a time-preserving latent sequence. A lightweight temporal token mapper downsamples the latent tem-poral sequence into M LLM-dimensional tokens, which is then passed as token in the LLM input. The LLM produces a pooled representation for multi-label prediction, trained with a PU-safe dynamic-weight focal loss ( §B.6). 

B.3 Temporal Graph Encoder 

B.3.1 Node Features with Ontology and Domain Signals 

Each node i ∈ V is associated with: (a) a trainable embedding ei ∈ Rde , (b) an ontology-derived auxiliary vector oi ∈ Rdo (e.g., concept ontological attributes), and (c) an optional domain assignment g(i) ∈ { 1, . . . , D } with embedding dg(i) ∈ Rdd . We form an initial feature 

h(0)  

> i

= Wcomb 

h

ei ; oi ; dg(i)

i

∈ Rd0 , (B6) where Wcomb ∈ Rd0×(de+do+dd) is a learned linear projection and [ · ; · ] denotes concatenation. 

B.3.2 Ontology-based initialization of embeddings 

We enrich the knowledge graph representation using ontological information about the entities. The ontology is hierarchical, with child terms being more specialized than their parent terms. An example of a hierarchical path would be disease → infectious disease → viral infectious disease → respiratory viral disease → COVID-19. Some 17 concepts are entities from the knowledge graph (the ones we are interested in build-ing representations for), while others are more general domain terms. Unlike a strict hierarchy, a term may have more than one parent term. This type of information is not unusual, with another common example being Gene Ontology [29]. To build these representations, we treat the ontology as a relational graph and run the RDF2vec algorithm [30]. RDF2vec uses random walks on the relational graph to create sequences of RDF nodes, which are then used as input for the word2vec 

algorithm [31]. The inductive bias of the word2vec algorithm, which assigns simi-lar vector representations to words appearing in similar local contexts, is particularly appropriate for building hierarchical ontological representations. If concepts sit near in the hierarchy, we indeed expect them to be similar. These representations are used as initial embeddings for the entities in the KG. More precisely, the initial represen-tation of each entity consists of two components: one that is randomly initialized and optimized during the model training, and one derived from the ontological embeddings described above, which injects structured domain knowledge into the representations. 

B.3.3 Neighborhood Sampling Across Time 

For scalability on large graphs, we compute embeddings via sampled message passing. Let N (t) 

> k

(i) denote the sampled set of neighbors at hop k for node i within snapshot 

G(t), with fixed fanout Sk = |N (t) 

> k

(i)|. Sampling is repeated per batch and can be reshuffled each iteration to reduce bias. When available, we also sample from a negative adjacency (for ranking regularization; §B.7). 

B.3.4 GraphSAGE Message Passing Per Snapshot 

For each snapshot t, we run K layers of GraphSAGE-style propagation [10]. Let 

h(k,t ) 

> i

∈ Rdk be the node embedding of node i at layer k for time t (with h(0 ,t ) 

> i

= h(0)  

> i

). At layer k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } we compute: 

m(k,t ) 

> i

= AGG (k) n 

h(k−1,t ) 

> j

: j ∈ N (t) 

> k

(i)

o 

∈ Rdk−1 , (B7) 

h(k,t ) 

> i

= ϕ



W(k) h

h(k−1,t ) 

> i

; m(k,t )

> i

i

+ b(k)

∈ Rdk , (B8) where: 

• AGG (k) is a permutation-invariant aggregator (e.g., mean), applied over the sampled multiset of neighbor embeddings; 

• W(k) ∈ Rdk ×(2 dk−1) and b(k) ∈ Rdk are learnable; 

• ϕ(·) is a nonlinearity (e.g., SiLU/GeLU). If edge-label features are available, the aggregator can be extended to incorporate edge label embeddings; the methodology here remains compatible by replacing the multiset in equation B7 with tuples ( hj , rij ). 18 B.3.5 Time-Resolved Pair Embeddings 

Given the final node embeddings for pair ( s, o ) at time t, the graph encoder constructs a time-specific pair representation ˜p(t) 

> so

= Norm 



h(K,t ) 

> s

+ h(K,t )

> o



, (B9) 

p(t) 

> so

= Wpair ˜p(t) 

> so

+ bpair ∈ Rdg . (B10) The sequence 

Pso =

h

p(1)  

> so

, . . . , p(T )

> so

i

∈ RT ×dg (B11) is then passed to the temporal encoder. The graph model returns a positive pair embedding z+

> so

, an optional negative-pair embedding z− 

> s˜o

for link ranking, a temporal latent sequence Ztemp  

> so

= [ z+1 , ..., z +

> m

], and a learned label-embedding matrix Elabel ∈

RC×dg .

B.3.6 Hierarchical Temporal Transformer 

We model inter-window dependencies using a Transformer [32] applied on the temporal axis, with a hierarchical reduction that halves sequence length after each stage. Let 

H(0) = Pso ∈ RT ×dg . At stage l, the current length is Ll (initially L0 = T ). We apply 

R Transformer layers: 

H(l,r +1) = Tx (l,r )

H(l,r ); B(l)

, r = 0 , . . . , R − 1, (B12) where B(l) ∈ RLl×Ll is an additive attention-bias matrix (defined below). Then we merge adjacent positions: 

H(l+1 ,0)  

> k

= H(l,R )2k−1 + H(l,R )2k , k = 1 , . . . , 

 Ll

2



, (B13) padding the last element if Ll is odd. After L = ⌈log 2 T ⌉ stages, we obtain a single global graph vector: 

zgraph  

> so

= H(L, 0) 1 ∈ Rdg . (B14) 

Pair-block attention bias A known failure mode of hierarchical “attend-then-merge” temporal Transformers is a degenerate pre-merge shortcut : because the next operation deterministically sums the fixed pair (2 k − 1, 2k), the self-attention layers immediately before merging can minimize loss by concentrating attention mass within each soon-to-be-merged pair (i.e., token (2 k−1) attending primarily to (2 k) and vice versa), effectively behaving like a local two-token mixing operator. In that regime, the model under-utilizes cross-time interactions across merge groups, and the subsequent summation tends to collapse highly correlated representations, reducing the benefit of having a global self-attention stage. To explicitly prevent this shortcut and enforce 

cross-group temporal information flow prior to length reduction, we apply an additive attention bias that suppresses attention only between the two tokens that will be 19 Input P so                                                                                              

> length T= 8 p₁p₂p₃p₄p₅p₆p₇p₈
> Transformer Layer(s) + Pairmate Mask Σ merge (sum pairs)
> T/2 = 4 h₁⁽ ¹⁾h₂⁽ ¹⁾h₃⁽ ¹⁾h₄⁽ ¹⁾temporal latents
> Transformer Layer(s) + Pairmate Mask Σ merge
> T/4 = 2 h₁⁽ ²⁾h₂⁽ ²⁾temporal latents
> Transformer Layer(s) + Pairmate Mask Σ merge
> $$\mathbf{z^+_{so}}$$
> Global vector (length 1)
> Intermediate Temporal Latents
> Pairmate Masking Detail
> Attention bias matrix (one merge level, T= 8)
> p₁p₂p₃p₄p₅p₆p₇p₈
> p₁
> p₂
> p₃
> p₄
> p₅
> p₆
> p₇
> p₈
> 0−∞ 000000
> −∞ 0000000000−∞ 000000−∞ 0000000000−∞ 000000−∞ 0000000000−∞
> 000000−∞ 0
> Keys →
> Queries ↓
> Input token Merged hidden Global output z Pairmate masked (−∞) Temporal latents

Fig. B1 : Temporal modeling via hierarchical Transformer with pairwise merging and pairmate-only attention masking. merged together, while leaving self-attention intact. Formally, for a temporal sequence of length Ll at hierarchical stage l, we define B(l) ∈ RLl×Ll as 

B(l)

ij =

(

−β,  i−12

 =  j−12

 ∧ i̸ = j, 

0, otherwise , β ≫ 1, (B15) where i indexes the query position and j indexes the key position (1-indexed). This yields a 2 × 2 within-block pattern 

 0 −β

−β 0



: cross-attention between the pairmates is discouraged, so each token must draw contextual evidence from other time steps outside its merge pair before the deterministic summation is applied. In practice, β is implemented as a large negative constant approximating −∞ , making the forbidden within-pair cross-attention weights negligible after softmax. 

B.4 Graph-to-Token Mapping and LLM Injection 

B.4.1 Temporal Token Mapper 

The LLM consumes embeddings in Rd, while the temporal graph sequence lies in Rdg .Therefore, we map the temporal latent sequence into a short prefix of graph tokens using a dedicated temporal mapper. 

Ztemp 

so ∈ RN ×dg (B16) be the temporal output of the graph encoder. The mapper first applies a reduction operator 

Rso = Reduce Mmax (Ztemp 

so ) ∈ RM ′×dg , M ′ ≤ Mmax , (B17) 20 where N is the total number of time steps, M ′ = N if N ≤ Mmax , and otherwise the sequence is downsampled to length Mmax using adaptive average pooling or linear interpolation. Specifically, we do not upsample short sequences to a fixed length; short temporal sequences are kept as they are. 

B.4.2 Fourier time temporal encoding and gating 

To preserve temporal order, we add a Fourier time encoding to the temporal embedding mapper 

ψ(tm) = Wt [sin(2 πf 1tm), . . . , sin(2 πf F tm); cos(2 πf 1tm), . . . , cos(2 πf F tm)] ∈ Rd,

(B18) with tm ∈ [0 , 1] defined on a uniform grid over the actual prefix length M ′. The final graph token is 

gm = σ(γ) · RMSNorm( ϕ(rm) + ψ(tm)) , (B19) where γ is a learned scalar gate shared across the temporal prefix. This gate allows the model to control how strongly graph information enters the LLM. 

B.4.3 Global pair projector 

In addition to the temporal prefix, the global graph representation is projected into a single LLM-space conditioning vector 

gpair  

> so

= RMSNorm  Wgp z+

> so

 ∈ Rd. (B20) This vector provides a compact pair-level summary that is separate from the temporal prefix. 

B.4.4 Embedding-Level Splicing at the <htg> Placeholder 

Let x = ( x1, . . . , x L) denote a tokenized prompt of length L containing exactly one 

<htg> token at position k, i.e., xk = <htg> . Let Emb( ·) : Vocab → Rd be the LLM embedding table. The text embedding sequence is: 

E = [Emb( x1), . . . , Emb( xk−1), Emb( xk), Emb( xk+1 ), . . . , Emb( xL)] ∈ RL×d. (B21) We remove the placeholder embedding Emb( xk) and splice in the global node-pair graph embedding Gso and then prepend the temporal node-pair embeddings [g1; . . . ; gM ] ∈ RM ×d:

E′ = [ g1, . . . , gM , Emb( x1), . . . , Emb( xk−1), Gso , Emb( xk+1 ), . . . , Emb( xL)] ∈ R(L+M )×d.

(B22) Thus, the LLM processes a sequence of length L′ = L + M . Graph tokens are always treated as valid tokens and are assigned indices as if the insertion had not occurred (up to an offset). This preserves the distribution of relative positions among text tokens. 21 Original prompt                                           

> (length L)t₁t₂…tp−1 <htg> tp+1 …tL
> 12p−1 pp+1 L
> Replace & Splice
> <htg> →Gso
> Graph Token Construction Gso
> Global node-pair embedding
> g₁, g ₂, …, g M
> Temporal node-pair embeddings (×M) projected to model dim E
> Expanded sequence
> (length L+M)t₁t₂…tp−1 Gso g₁g₂…gMtp+1 …tL
> 12p−1 012Mp+1 Lpos idx: pos idx:
> M+ 1 graph tokens
> Text token <htg> placeholder Global graph token (G so )Temporal graph token

Fig. B2 : Token-based injection by replacing <htg> with global node-pair embedding and prepending M temporal graph tokens 

B.5 LLM Encoder and Multi-label Prediction 

Let LLM θ be a decoder-only Transformer with parameters θ. Given the prefixed embedding sequence E′ ∈ RL′×d together with the graph-pair conditioning vector 

gpair 

so , the language model produces hidden states 

H = LLM θ(E′, a′, π; gpair 

so ) ∈ RL′×d. (B23) For pooling, the current implementation uses entity-aware pooling whenever explicit entity markers are available. Let e1 and e2 denote the token positions of the two entity markers corresponding to s and o in the original text sequence, respectfully. After prefix insertion, the pooled text representation is 

htext 

so = 12 (He1+M ′ + He2+M ′ ) . (B24) If entity markers are unavailable, the model falls back to the last non-padding token. 

Text logits. A bias-free linear head first produces base text logits, 

ℓbase 

so = Wcls htext 

so ∈ RC . (B25) 

History-aware label correction. The current implementation augments these base text logits with a history-aware residual term derived from known label history. Let ec ∈ Rdg denote the embedding of label c, and let hhist 

so,c be the history context obtained by attending from label c to the set of labels already known at query time 

τ . The refined text logit is 

ℓtext 

so,c = ℓbase 

so,c + αc

D

Wemb ec + Wctx hhist 

so,c , Wtext htext 

so 

E

, (B26) where αc = σ(ac) is a learned per-label merge coefficient. 22 Graph logits. The graph branch also predicts labels directly from the global graph embedding. Using the same history context, the graph logit for label c is 

ℓgraph  

> so,c

=

D

Wz z+ 

> so

+ Whhhist  

> so,c

+ b, ec

E

. (B27) The model therefore outputs two complementary score vectors, ℓtext  

> so

and ℓgraph  

> so

, which are supervised jointly during training. 

Inference-time ensemble and blended calibration. At inference time, the two branches are combined by a label-wise ensemble 

ℓens  

> so,c

= αens  

> c

ℓgraph  

> so,c

+ (1 − αens  

> c

) ℓtext  

> so,c

, (B28) where αens  

> c

∈ [0 , 1] is tuned per label on validation data by cross-validation. These ensemble logits are then calibrated into probabilities. In the blended calibration setting, ˆpso,c = (1 − βblend ) Platt c

 ℓens 

> so,c

 + βblend Iso c

 ℓens 

> so,c

 , (B29) where Platt c is a per-label logistic calibrator, Iso c is a per-label isotonic calibrator, and 

βblend ∈ [0 , 1] is chosen on validation data. Final binary predictions are obtained using label-specific thresholds selected on the validation set, typically with a precision–recall criterion. 

B.6 PU-safe Dynamic-Weighted Focal BCE with Regularization 

We optimize the LLM logits ℓso with a weighted loss we call Dynamically Weighted Balanced Focal loss (DWF) drawing inspiration from the Dynamically Weighted Bal-anced loss [33] and Focal loss [34]. This loss combines: (i) focal reweighting [34], (ii) dynamic class-balancing weights, (iii) PU-safe downweighting of unlabeled negatives, and (iv) an explicit confidence regularizer. 

B.6.1 Elementwise Definitions 

For one entity pair example ( s, o ) and one label c, let 

• yso,c = 1[tso,c > 0] ∈ { 0, 1} be the binary target derived from the temporal label annotation; 

• ℓtext  

> so,c

and ℓgraph  

> so,c

be the text and graph logits; 

• ˜yso,c ∈ [0 , 1] be the soft target used in training. Soft targets are obtained by annealing the unlabeled entries: ˜yso,c = yso,c + (1 − yso,c ) ηc(i), (B30) where i is the current training step and 

ηc(i) = clip(ˆ qc ηmax r(i), 0, η cap r(i)) . (B31) 23 Here, ˆ qc is a label-specific prior estimate, r(i) is a warm-up schedule, and ηmax and 

ηcap are user-defined constants. This construction makes the supervision less brittle in the positive–unlabeled regime. Define the probability of the correct class: 

pt = y p + (1 − y)(1 − p). (B32) 

B.6.2 Weighted BCE Terms (with PU-safe unlabeled negatives) 

We write BCE in separated positive/negative terms: BCE +(z, y ) = −y log( p + ε), (B33) BCE −(z, y ) = −(1 − y) log(1 − p + ε). (B34) In PU learning, the y = 0 entries are unlabeled; treating them as negatives is biased. We mitigate this by scaling the negative term: 

]BCE( z, y ) = w+ BCE +(z, y ) + w− λu BCE −(z, y ). (B35) Thus unlabeled negatives contribute less to gradients than confirmed positives. 

B.6.3 Focal and Dynamic Class-Balancing Factors 

Focal factor. The focal factor downweights easy examples ( pt ≈ 1) [34]: Focal( pt) = (1 − pt)γ . (B36) 

Dynamic weight. We define a dynamic multiplicative factor that depends on pt:Dyn( pt; cw) = c 1−pt 

> w

. (B37) Interpretation: if the example is hard ( pt small), the effective weight approaches cw; if it is easy ( pt near 1), it approaches 1. This provides a smooth, probability-dependent form of class balancing. 

B.6.4 Confidence Regularization 

We include a bounded regularizer based on Bernoulli variance: 

R(p) = p(1 − p) ∈



0, 14



. (B38) The implemented loss subtracts λreg R(p): 

−λreg R(p) ≥ − λreg 

4 , (B39) 24 so it cannot make the objective unbounded below. This term encourages confident predictions (away from p = 0 .5) once the focal/dynamic weighting drives learning on informative examples. 

B.6.5 DWF: Per-entry and Batch-normalized Form 

Per-entry loss. Combining Eq. B35, Eq. B36, Eq. B37, and Eq. B38, the per-entry loss is: 

LDWF (z, y ) = Dyn( pt; cw) · Focal( pt) · ]BCE( z, y ) − λreg p(1 − p). (B40) 

Effective-mass normalization. Multi-label PU data exhibit highly variable pos-itive density across batches. To stabilize the overall scale, we normalize by an “effective mass”: 

γ = X Dyn( pt; cw) ·



w+y + w−(1 − y)λu



+ ε, (B41) where the sum is over all examples in the batch and all labels (broadcasting as needed). The final batch loss is: 

Lbatch =

P LDWF (z, y )

γ . (B42) This makes optimization less sensitive to label sparsity and the magnitude of 

cw, w +, w −.

B.7 Optional Auxiliary Graph Ranking Regularizer 

When negative pairs are available, we add a pairwise ranking loss that encourages the model to score the observed pair higher than a corrupted pair. Let zgraph  

> so

be the global graph embedding for the positive pair and zgraph  

> s˜o

for a negative pair ( s, ˜o) created by negative sampling. Define scalar scores: 

a+ = w⊤ 

> r

zgraph  

> so

, a− = w⊤ 

> r

zgraph  

> s˜p

, (B43) with trainable wr ∈ Rdg . The ranking loss is: 

Lrank = log  1 + exp   − (a+ − a−) . (B44) This term complements the PU classification objective by explicitly separating true pairs from sampled negatives in graph embedding space. 

B.8 Overall Optimization Objective 

Let Θ denote all trainable parameters (graph encoder, temporal Transformer, token mapper, and LLM classifier a subset of LLM parameters). For a batch B, we minimize: min  

> Θ

E(s,o, xso ,yso )∼B [Lbatch (ℓso , yso ) + λrank Lrank ] , (B45) where λrank ≥ 0 controls the auxiliary ranking term. 25 Algorithm 1 Forward pass with token-based temporal graph injection 

Require: Pair ( s, o ), text context xso , snapshots {G (t)}Tt=1 , placeholder index k, token budget M . 

> 1:

(1) Temporal GNN: node embeddings  

> 2:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 3:

Sample neighborhoods {N (t) 

> k

(·)}Kk=1 with fanouts {Sk}. 

> 4:

Compute {h(K,t ) 

> i

} by Eq. B7–B8.  

> 5:

Build p(t) 

> so

via Eq. B10.  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Stack Pso = [ p(1)  

> so

, . . . , p(T ) 

> so

] ∈ RT ×dg . 

> 8:

(2) Temporal Transformer  

> 9:

Compute zgraph  

> so

and temporal latents via Eq. B13–B15.  

> 10:

(3) Token mapper  

> 11:

Reduce to M and project to LLM space: Gso ∈ RM ×d by Eq. B17–B19.  

> 12:

(4) Prompt construction  

> 13:

Tokenize prompt containing exactly one <htg> token at position k. 

> 14:

(5) Token injection  

> 15:

Replace <htg> with Gso using Eq. B22; build a′ and RoPE indices π via Eq. B23.  

> 16:

(6) LLM forward pass  

> 17:

H = LLM θ(E′, a′, π) and pool hso via Eq. B24.  

> 18:

(7) Logits computation  

> 19:

Compute ℓso via Eq. B25.  

> 20:

return Logits ℓso .

B.9 Complexity Discussion (Precise Token/Graph Contributions) 

Let L be the original prompt length and L′ = L+M −1 the spliced length. LLM cost. 

For a decoder-only Transformer with d dimension, N layers, the dominant attention cost per example is: 

O



N · L′2 · d



, (B46) so the overhead of graph injection is controlled by M and scales quadratically in L′.

Temporal GNN cost. With fanouts {Sk}Kk=1 and T snapshots, message passing is approximately: 

O

T · B ·

> K

X

> k=1



> k

Y

> j=1

Sj

 · dg

 , (B47) for neighborhood expansion and aggregation (constants depend on the aggregator and implementation). The hierarchical temporal Transformer over length T reduces cost relative to a single full-attention layer by merging; worst-case is O(T 2dg ) at the first stage, but subsequent stages shrink quadratically as length halves. 26 Algorithm 2 Training step with DWF (PU-safe) and ranking Loss 

Require: Batch {(si, o i, xsioi , ysioi )}Bi=1 ; γ, λ u, λ reg ; cw, w +, w −; λrank . 

> 1:

for i = 1 → B do  

> 2:

ℓi ← Forward (si, o i, xsioi ) using Algorithm 1.  

> 3:

end for  

> 4:

(Classification loss) Compute Lbatch via Eq. B40–B42 over all ( i, c ).  

> 5:

if λrank > 0 then  

> 6:

Sample negative pairs ( si, ˜oi) and compute a+ 

> i

, a − 

> i

; compute Lrank via Eq. B44.  

> 7:

L ← L batch + λrank · 1

> B

PBi=1 L(i)rank . 

> 8:

else  

> 9:

L ← L batch . 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

Backpropagate ∇ΘL and update parameters with an optimizer step. 

# Appendix C Benchmarking THiGERLLM 

We evaluated THiGERLLM against a diverse set of baseline models for multi-label relation prediction under a temporally separated protocol designed to prevent training-time information leakage. This evaluation assesses model performance on temporally held-out data, testing its ability to identify relations that emerge in later years. Exper-iments are conducted using multiple temporal cut-off years: 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2020. For each cut-off year t, all relation instances represented as triples ( s, r, o ) first observed on or before t are used for model training. Relation instances first observed after t are reserved for evaluation. For each cut-off year, we randomly sample a vali-dation subset of 100,000 subject–object entity pairs from those that first appear after the cut-off year, and exclude them from the final test set. Models perform multi-label edge prediction by assigning one or more candidate relation types to a given subject–object entity pair. Each pair is evaluated over the full relation space. For evaluation at cut-off t, a predicted relation type is considered a true positive if the corresponding relation instance is first observed after t. Relation types not observed after t are treated as negative instances for metric computation within the evaluation period. 

C.1 Baselines 

The selected baseline models represent complementary modeling paradigms, enabling systematic comparison across heuristic, similarity-based, supervised learning, struc-tural knowledge graph embedding, temporal graph modeling, and literature-based hypothesis generation approaches. A random baseline assigns relations randomly among candidate relation types, serving as a lower-bound reference for evaluating whether meaningful structure can be recovered beyond chance. KNN (k-nearest neigh-bors), as a similarity-based predictor operating on subject–object representations, evaluates whether local proximity in the representation space alone can recover emerg-ing relations without explicit relational modeling. A graph-only, rule-based multi-label 27 classifier learns per-node label profiles and label-specific neighbor sets from train-ing edges, then scores each label for a pair ( s, o ) using label-wise common neighbors plus a weighted popularity term. The core score components are taken from Com-mon Neighbors (CN) and Preferential Attachment (PA) [35]. An MLP (multi-layer perceptron) supervised multi-label classifier trained on observed relation instances isolates general supervised learning capacity from explicit structural modeling of knowledge graphs. A structural knowledge graph model based on ComplEx [20] cap-tures relational structure through complex-valued representations. A temporal graph modeling baseline based on tNodeEmbed [21] captures the evolution of graph struc-ture over time. In our implementation, sequences of entity representations over time are processed using an LSTM-based sequence encoder. Node representations are provided by the shared embedding space used across models, instead of learning time-evolving node embeddings. Our previous model THiGER [7] is a time-aware knowledge graph–based predictor that integrates temporal and structural signals to rank plau-sible relations. Finally, we here also include a literature-based hypothesis generation approach incorporating selected components of Agatha [36], including transformer-based representations and its negative sampling strategy. In our implementation, we do not perform graph embedding learning as in the original model; instead, node representations are derived from the shared embedding space used across models. Several baseline methods (e.g., ComplEx and Agatha ) were originally proposed for binary link prediction or association scoring tasks. To enable comparison under our prediction setting, their prediction layers are reformulated to perform multi-label relation prediction over candidate relation types. Similarly, where applicable, input representations are constructed using the same ontology-based embeddings as used by THiGERLLM . This common representation space ensures that performance differences reflect modeling capabilities rather than differences in underlying entity representations. All models are evaluated using the same temporal split and validation protocol for each cut-off year. Due to Agatha ’s high resource demands and limitations on the computational infrastructure available for benchmarking, results are reported only for the 1990 and 2000 cut-offs. Mean nDCG (averaged over k ∈ { 1, 3, 5, 10 }) serves to assess ranking quality independently of threshold selection. Ranking metrics are computed over the full candidate set. 

C.2 Performance across temporal cut-offs 

Fig. C3 shows mean nDCG over all candidate relations, again indicating consistently strong performance of THiGERLLM and THiGER across temporal splits. Fig. C4 provides a summary of model performance across different temporal cut-offs (1990, 2000, 2010, and 2020). Overall, the trends observed in the main text remain consis-tent across all training horizons. In particular, THiGERLLM maintains an advantage in F 1,macro , driven primarily by improvements in macro recall. Also, THiGERLLM 

achieves higher Rec macro than THiGER for all cut-off periods except 1990, indicat-ing that the benefit of incorporating textual information becomes more pronounced as more temporal data is available. 28 1990 2000 2010 2020 Temporal cut-off year 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Mean nDCG (all candidate relations) 

> Random RuleBased KNN MLP ComplEx TNodeEmbed Agatha THiGER THiGERLLM

Fig. C3 : Temporal evaluation across historical cut-offs (ranking over all candidates). Mean nDCG computed over the full candidate set (including both trans-ductive and inductive cases). Scores are reported for temporal cut-offs at 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2020. 

C.3 Per-relation-type evaluation 

To understand whether the advantage of THiGERLLM over THiGER depends on the frequency of a relation type, we computed per-relation-type differences in precision, recall, and F1 and regressed each against the log-transformed support (Figure C5). The analysis reveals two significant and opposing trends. THiGERLLM achieves substan-tially higher recall on low-support relation types. This trend is statistically significant and indicates that the LLM-augmented model is better able to recover rare edges that 

THiGER misses. Conversely, this recall gain comes at the cost of precision, which is lower for low-support types, suggesting that THiGERLLM produces more false pos-itives in the long tail of the relation-type distribution. Importantly, these two effects cancel out in terms of F1, whose slope is not significantly different from zero. This indicates that the overall F1 of THiGERLLM and THiGER is uniform across relation types regardless of their support, and is not driven by a few highly populated classes. Taken together, these results suggest that the LLM component primarily improves the ability of the model to recall underrepresented relation types—a desirable prop-erty for knowledge graph completion tasks where the long tail of rare relations is often the most informative—while maintaining a stable F1 trade-off across the full support spectrum. 

C.4 Top-m evaluation under a fixed prediction budget 

In addition to threshold-based evaluation, we report a complementary top-m analy-sis in Table C1, where for each entity pair only the top-m predicted relation labels are retained as positive predictions. We use m ∈ { 1, 3, 5}. This protocol controls the prediction budget across models and therefore reduces sensitivity to threshold calibra-tion. As such, it provides a useful alternative view of model behavior in the multi-label setting. 29 Random ComplEx KNN MLP RuleBased Agatha TNodeEmbed THiGER THiGERLLM 020 40 60 80 100 Prec macro      

> 020 40 60 80 100 Rec macro
> 020 40 60 80 100 F1, macro
> 020 40 60 80 100 Prec w
> 020 40 60 80 100 Rec w
> 020 40 60 80 100 F1, w 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100

Fig. C4 : Benchmark performance of models trained incrementally up to different cutoff years. Rows correspond to training cut-offs at 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2020 (top to bottom). Each model is evaluated on the following decade, except the model trained up to 2020, which is evaluated on data through 2023. Columns show different metrics. The results further support the conclusions drawn from the threshold-based eval-uation in the main text. Across all prediction budgets, THiGERLLM achieves the strongest macro-averaged F1 score, indicating that it is particularly effective when performance is evaluated uniformly across relation types rather than being dominated by frequent relations. This is consistent with the main results, where THiGERLLM 

improves macro recall and macro F1, suggesting better coverage of less frequent relation classes. At m = 1, THiGERLLM and THiGER perform very similarly, with only minor differences across metrics. This indicates that both models produce strong top-ranked predictions and that there is no decisive advantage for either model when only a single relation label is retained per entity pair. As the prediction budget increases from m = 1 to m = 3, performance generally improves, especially in terms of recall, as expected. 30 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5             

> Relation-type support (log 10 scale)
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
> metric  (THiGERLLM  THiGER)
> Precision |slope=+0.085, p=0.009, R2=0.29 Recall |slope=-0.198, p=0.001, R2=0.45 F1 |slope=-0.002, p=0.935, R2=0.00

Per-relation-type metric gain of THiGERLLM over THiGER       

> Precision Recall F1 012345
> Support (log 10 )
> decreases transcriptional activity of increases transcriptional activity of is a target for affects transcriptional activity of increases degradation of inhibits proliferation of affects degradation of inhibits growth of decreases abundance of metabolizes is a biomarker increases abundance of affects abundance of prevents is a decreases expression of contains increases expression of treats affects expression of inhibits induces
> Relation type
> 102 165 293 297 542 640 646 991 1,237 2,716 2,963 7,085 9,271 12,985 17,645 22,095 45,151 46,090 54,060 74,842 77,568 123,009
> Test-set support per relation type

Fig. C5 : Per-relation-type performance gain of THiGERLLM over THiGER as a function of relation-type test support. Left: For each relation type, the change in Precision, Recall, and F1 is plotted against the number of test facts (log 10 -scaled). Each point represents one relation type. Dashed lines show ordinary least-squares fits on log-scaled support. The inset reports the slope, p-value, and R2 for each metric. 

Right: Distribution of test-set support across relation types, shown on a log 10 scale. This figure illustrates how the relative performance gain of THiGERLLM varies with relation frequency. Under this setting, THiGERLLM begins to show a clearer advantage over THiGER ,particularly for macro-level metrics. At m = 5, recall becomes very high while precision decreases, reflecting the expected trade-off introduced by retaining more predicted labels: more true rela-tions are recovered, but more false positives are also introduced. Under this larger prediction budget, THiGERLLM becomes consistently stronger, especially on macro-averaged metrics. This reinforces the interpretation from the main text that the textual component helps recover correct triples across a broader range of relation types. Traditional baselines such as KNN, MLP, and RuleBased remain competitive in some settings, particularly for weighted precision or weighted recall. However, their performance is less consistent across prediction budgets and evaluation metrics than that of THiGER and THiGERLLM .Overall, the top-m analysis confirms that THiGERLLM is preferable when bal-anced performance across relation types is the primary objective, whereas THiGER 

remains a strong alternative and can be preferable under weighted metrics, where frequent relation types have greater influence. 

# Appendix D Predicted Hypothesis Elucidation with Literature-Inferred Explanations (PHELInE )

THiGERLLM is capable of generating novel, high-confidence hypotheses in the form of (s, r, o ) triples. However, these predictions are not inherently interpretable to domain 31 Table C1 : Baseline comparison for time-aware multi-label relation pre-diction under a 2020 cut-off using top-m evaluation ( m = 1 , 3, 5). For each entity pair, only the top-m predicted relation labels are treated as positive predictions. Macro- and weighted precision, recall, and F1 are reported in percent. Unlike threshold-based evaluation, this setting compares models under a fixed prediction budget. 

Model Prec m 

> macro

Rec m 

> macro

F m 

> 1,macro

Prec m 

> w

Rec m 

> w

F m

> 1,w

m = 1 Random 6.04 4.99 3.19 19.12 5.01 7.34 ComplEx 5.34 4.14 3.95 17.15 9.76 12.29 KNN 33.13 23.54 24.34 61.64 52.16 53.19 MLP 37.51 25.54 26.43 65.50 58.46 57.74 RuleBased 38.92 18.53 19.78 58.37 48.84 47.02 Agatha - - - - - -TNodeEmbed 36.70 25.98 26.76 67.37 60.24 59.31 THiGER 47 .18 32 .63 34.48 70.20 67 .52 68 .40 

THiGERLLM 46.85 32.21 35 .94 74 .26 63.64 66.87 

m = 3 Random 5.48 11.47 4.44 16.33 19.08 10.76 ComplEx 5.34 12.52 6.98 17.15 30.74 21.90 KNN 29.61 33.89 26.73 53 .16 65.11 53.85 MLP 22.07 47.72 27.14 44.44 87.05 56.93 RuleBased 21.20 35.00 22.66 37.39 78.44 48.29 Agatha - - - - - -TNodeEmbed 22.47 45.73 26.86 44.90 87.50 57.28 THiGER 30.37 61 .47 37.71 46.98 95 .28 61.22 THiGERLLM 38 .97 59.40 44 .68 50.25 95.06 62 .66 

m = 5 Random 6.12 22.48 4.00 18.24 10.10 8.54 ComplEx 5.33 21.12 8.07 17.12 48.73 25.16 KNN 25.74 38.47 22.41 57 .89 59.44 56 .12 

MLP 14.87 63.69 21.48 34.40 95.45 48.62 RuleBased 14.48 50.48 18.80 31.19 88.73 44.11 Agatha - - - - - -TNodeEmbed 13.32 65.18 20.47 30.05 95.60 44.70 THiGER 18.04 71.95 25.95 31.75 98.49 46.09 THiGERLLM 29 .44 72 .34 38 .26 38.51 98 .51 51.21 

experts. In practice, a score alone rarely provides insight into why the model expects a particular relation to hold, what evidence supports the prediction, or how it relates to existing scientific knowledge. In scientific discovery, interpretability is essential not only for establishing trust but also for enabling meaningful action. Scientists must be able to understand and evaluate the rationale behind a proposed hypothesis; knowing that a connection is likely is insufficient without an explanation of the underlying factors that support it. Prior work has shown that user trust on AI systems depend strongly on perceived understanding of model decisions, particularly when explanations are interactive or 32 counterfactual in nature. This requirement is especially pronounced in high-stakes domains such as biomedicine, where scientific validation demands transparent and scientifically justifiable reasoning rather than black-box predictions. Existing explanation methods for KG link prediction suffer from several important limitations. They are often computationally inefficient, tied to specific model archi-tectures, and narrow in scope, for example, restricting explanations to facts directly connected to the target triple. These constraints substantially limit their general applicability in scientific domains. A substantial body of prior work has focused on explaining GNN-based predictors through various paradigms, including feature attribution methods [37], predictive sub-graph identification [38–40], and counterfactual explanations [41–43]. However, these approaches are typically tailored to GNNs and do not readily generalize to other classes of KG predictors. Another line of work targets KGE models specifically [44]. Complementary research has explored logic-based explanations by mining symbolic rules from KGs to identify predictive paths that support model decisions [45–48] Although interpretable, such approaches can struggle to scale. A separate stream of work examines the influence of training data on KGE predictions, estimating how perturbations to the training set affect model scores using techniques such as Taylor approximations [49, 50], instance attribution methods [51, 52], or model retraining [53, 54]. Additionally, several meth-ods seek to distill KGE model scores into surrogate GNNs to extract explanatory subgraphs, often under relatively loose structural constraints[55–58] To overcome these limitations, we introduce PHELInE (Predicted Hypothesis Elucidation with Literature-Inferred Explanations), a fast, model-agnostic explana-tion framework that provides contextual information to support the predictions of THiGERLLM, while remaining scalable and broadly applicable across KG prediction architectures. 

D.1 Notation 

We assume that our knowledge graph G is partitioned into disjoint subsets G = Gtrain ∪Gunseen , where Gunseen usually comprises validation and test triples. Finally, we consider a trained predictive model with parameters θ (e.g., THiGERLLM ) and a scoring function f θ (s, r, o ) ∈ R, which assigns a real-valued score to any triple ( s, r, o ). Refer to B.1 for further notation. 

D.2 Overview of the Explainer 

The input to the explainer is a hypotheses ( s, r, o ) together with its model score fθ (s, r, o ). We begin by defining the search space Y := {(s, r, o ) ∈ Ω|Ck(s, r, o ) = True ∀k = 1 , . . . , K }, which contains all candidate facts that satisfy a set of K boolean constraints. Candidate explanations X are a subset of Y. This formulation allows us to restrict the search space as needed. For example, setting C1(s, r, o ) = ( s, r, o ) ∈ G 

yields Y = G, i.e., explanations composed solely of observed facts. 33 To quantify the influence of a candidate explanation X on the prediction of the trained model, we employ a pseudo-retraining procedure F. This algorithm approxi-mates how modifying the training context of the model—by adding or removing the facts in X —would change the score assigned by f θ .Based on this mechanism, we define an explanation scoring function Ψ( X ; s, r, o, F, θ ) ∈ R, which measures the effectiveness of X in supporting or influ-cencing the prediction for ( s, r, o ). The output of the framework is one or several explanations X = {si, r i, o i}ki=1 , i.e., a set of contextual facts whose presence (or absence) significantly affects the score f θ (s, r, o ). In general terms, the framework solves the following optimization problem: 

{X ⋆ 

> 1

, . . . , X ⋆K } = TopK X ⊆Y\ ∅ Ψ( X ; s, r, o, F, θ ). (D48) This problem depends on the specification of the search space, the underlying prediction model, and several core components. First, a pseudo-retraining algorithm estimates how each candidate explanation affects the score of the model. Next, a candidate finder identifies the most promising explanation sets within the constrained search space. These candidates are then evaluated by an explanation scoring function, which measures their relevance or influence on the prediction. Finally, a reranking strategy organizes the top candidates according to user-defined requirements. The framework is model-agnostic, requiring only query access to the scoring function f θ (s, r, o ); it does not rely on model weights or training details, making it applicable even to black-box predictors. It also offers a flexible candidate search mechanism, allowing different strategies for exploring the search space—for example, searching over graph-derived structures such as paths. Moreover, the scoring mecha-nism accommodates multiple explanation objectives, such as sufficiency and necessity, enabling users to tailor explanations to their preferred interpretive lens. 

D.3 Candidate finder 

The goal of the candidate finder is to identify the the subset of Y that is most relevant for optimizing the objective in Eq. D48. We propose two complementary modes for deriving these candidate sets, depending on whether the user prefers to rely strictly on observed graph structure or to incorporate plausible but unobserved relations. 

D.3.1 Corpus Path Candidate Finder 

Given a hypothesis ( s, r, o ), this approach enumerates all relational paths of length k

in the knowledge graph G (corpus) that connect the source entity s to the target entity 

o. All triples occurring along these paths are collected as candidate explanations. This method leverages the intuition that explicit graph connectivity often captures mean-ingful relational structure: paths encode multi-hop logical patterns that frequently provide useful context for the predicted relation. 

D.3.2 Latent Path Candidate Finder 

The second mode extends the search beyond the observed knowledge graph. Given a (s, r, o ), the method seeks paths of length k connecting s and o where intermediate 34 Algorithm 3 Model-agnostic Explanation Framework 

Require: hypothesis (s, r, o ); trained model with scoring function fθ (·); search space Y; pseudo-retraining procedure F; candidate finder FindCandidates ; scoring function Ψ; reranking strategy Rerank ; number of explanations K

Ensure: explanations {X ⋆ 

> 1

, . . . , X ⋆K } for ( s, r, o )

Generate candidate explanations  

> 1:

C ← FindCandidates (Y, s, r, o ) ▷ C ⊆ 2Y \ { ∅}

Score candidate explanations  

> 2:

Initialize list L ← [ ]  

> 3:

for all X ∈ C do  

> 4:

ψ ← Ψ( X ; s, r, o, F, θ ) ▷ influence of X on f θ (s, r, o ) via F  

> 5:

append ( X , ψ ) to L 

> 6:

end for Select top-K explanations  

> 7:

{X 1, . . . , XK } ← TopK (X ,ψ )∈L (ψ, K )

Rerank according to user requirements  

> 8:

{X ⋆ 

> 1

, . . . , X ⋆K } ← Rerank ({X 1, . . . , XK }, s, r, o ) 

> 9:

return {X ⋆ 

> 1

, . . . , X ⋆K }

triples may be either observed in G or plausible according to the prediction model. Such triples are not required to appear in the current graph but must received sufficiently high scores under f θ. This enables the framework to incorporate relational structure that the model considers plausible, even if it is not explicitly present in the graph. For example, for a hypothesis (drugA , treats , diseaseB), a plausible path might include (drugA , interactsWith , proteinC) and (proteinC , involvedIn , diseaseB) even if the first triple is not observed in the knowledge graph but is highly plausible accord-ing to the model. This mode allows explanations to capture latent or emerging relationships that the model relies on but that the graph has not yet recorded. 

D.4 Pseudo-retraining Procedure 

The goal of the pseudo-retraining procedure is to approximate how the prediction model f θ (s, r, o ) would behave if it were retrained on a modified training graph 

G′

> train

̸ = Gtrain , resulting in updated parameters θ′. In principle, to evaluate the influence of a candidate explanation X on a hypothesis ( s, r, o ), one would need to retrain the predictive model on a graph in which the triples in X have been added or removed. However, performing an actual retraining for every candidate explanation is computationally infeasible. To circumvent this, we train a surrogate model s ϕ (s, r, o | S ) that estimates how the original score of the model would change under different training graphs. The 35 Algorithm 4 Latent Path Candidate Finder 

Require: hypothesis ( s, r, o ); scoring function f θ (·); entity set V; relation set R; path length k; score threshold τ ; number of candidate paths N ; maximum trials per step T

Ensure: set of plausible paths Cpath (s, r, o ) 

> 1:

Cpath (s, r, o ) ← ∅ 

> 2:

for n = 1 to N do  

> 3:

e0 ← s; P ← [ ]  

> 4:

for i = 1 to k do  

> 5:

accepted ← false  

> 6:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 7:

sample ri ∼ Unif( R) 

> 8:

if i < k then  

> 9:

sample ei ∼ Unif( V) 

> 10:

else  

> 11:

ei ← o ▷ final hop must end at o 

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

ψ ← fθ (ei−1, r i, e i) 

> 14:

if ψ ≥ τ then  

> 15:

append ( ei−1, r i, e i) to P 

> 16:

accepted ← true  

> 17:

break  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

if not accepted then  

> 21:

break ▷ no plausible continuation  

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

if |P | = k then  

> 25:

Cpath (s, r, o ) ← C path (s, r, o ) ∪ { P } 

> 26:

end if  

> 27:

end for  

> 28:

return Cpath (s, r, o )surrogate is trained only once and then used to approximate the behavior of f θ (·)under perturbations of the training graph. Concretely, the surrogate is fitted to satisfy sϕ (s, r, o ; Gtrain ) ≈ fθ (s, r, o ) (D49) for both positive and negative triples. The training objective is 

L(ϕ) = X

> (s,r,o )∈G ⋆
> train

(s ϕ (s, r, o ; Gtrain ) − fθ (s, r, o )) 2 (D50) 36 where G⋆ 

> train

denotes the union of observed training triples and sampled negative triples. The surrogate model must satisfy two key requirements: 

Graph-conditional scoring: It must allow efficient evaluation of scores under a modified graph G′

> train

, enabling us to simulate the effect of adding or removing explanation triples. 

Computational efficiency: Score evaluation on different graphs should be achievable with a single (or very few) forward passes. This is essential to com-pute explanations at scale—for large knowledge graphs and thousands of candidate explanations—in practical runtimes (on the order of seconds). By using the surrogate as an approximation to full retraining, our framework achieves a tractable method for estimating the influence of candidate explanations while avoiding the prohibitive cost of repeatedly retraining the prediction model. In our experiments, we use GraphSAGE [59] as the surrogate model architecture. 

D.5 Explanation Scoring and Types 

To evaluate the quality of a candidate explanation X for a hypotehsis ( s, r, o ), we define two complementary scoring objectives: sufficiency and necessity. These scores quantify how strongly the triples in X influence the output of the model and allow the framework to support different explanation goals. 

D.5.1 Sufficiency 

The sufficiency score measures how well the triples in X alone can reproduce the model’s score for ( s, r, o ). Intuitively, an explanation is sufficient if adding only the explanation triples to an otherwise empty (or minimally informative) graph yields a high predicted score. Formally, using the surrogate model ϕ,Suff ( X ) = s ϕ (s, r, o | X ) − fθ (s, r, o ) , (D51) which quantifies how strongly X supports the hypothesis. 

D.5.2 Necessity 

The necessity score measures how much the model’s prediction deteriorates when the triples in X are removed from the training graph. An explanation is necessary if its removal causes a strong drop in the predicted score. Let Gtrain \ X denote the graph with the explanation removed. The necessity score is then defined as Nec ( X ) = f θ (s, r, o ) − sϕ (s, r, o | G train \ X ) , (D52) which captures how critical X is to the original prediction of the model. By selecting one or combining both, users can tailor explanations to emphasize the most supportive or indispensable facts behind a given prediction. 

D.6 Reranking 

After candidate explanations have been generated and scored, the final step of the framework is to rerank the top candidates according to user-defined preferences. The 37 reranking stage allows the framework to produce explanations that satisfy desiderata that go beyond the raw optimization objective in Eq. D48. In our implementation, we prioritize unique pathways, meaning that we rank higher those explanations that correspond to distinct relational paths—i.e., paths that involve different intermediate entities. This ensures that the user is presented with diverse reasoning patterns rather than multiple variants of the same underlying path. However, the methodology is deliberately general. The reranking function R can implement a wide range of criteria, including: 

• Domain-specific constraints, such as prioritizing biomedical pathways, causal direc-tionality, or temporal consistency. 

• Faithfulness-oriented reranking, emphasizing explanations with the strongest suffi-ciency or necessity scores. The output of the reranking step is a collection of explanation subgraphs or sets of contextual triples {X ⋆ 

> 1

, . . . , X ⋆K }, representing the top explanations under the chosen criterion. 

D.7 Final Thoughts 

D.7.1 Model-agnostic design 

A key strength of the proposed framework is its model-agnostic nature. Because it interacts with the predictive model solely through queries to the scoring function fθ (s, r, o ), the approach applies to any knowledge graph model—embedding-based, rule-based, or hybrid—without requiring access to model parameters, gradients, or training procedures. At the same time, if any of these internal components are avail-able, such as model weights, intermediate embeddings, or training metadata, the framework can leverage them to enhance the pseudo-retraining procedure, yielding more accurate or more efficient explanation estimates. This flexibility allows the method to function in fully black-box settings while still benefiting from richer model access when possible. 

D.7.2 Scalability 

The framework is designed with scalability in mind. The candidate finder restricts the search space to promising graph neighborhoods or plausible paths; the surrogate model provides rapid score estimates; and the reranking step operates on a small subset of top candidates. Together, these components make it possible to generate explanations in seconds even for large graphs containing millions of triples. 

D.7.3 Limitations and future directions 

Despite its strengths, several challenges remain. The fidelity of the explanations depends on the ability of the surrogate model—GraphSAGE in our experiments—to accurately approximate the behavior of the original predictive model under graph per-turbations. Improving surrogate fidelity or incorporating uncertainty estimates would strengthen trust in the explanations. 38 Additionally, while our scoring functions capture sufficiency and necessity, they do not explicitly address causal notions of influence; extending the framework with causal or counterfactual reasoning remains an important direction for future work. 

# Appendix E Biomedical Data Provenance, Extraction & Cleaning 

The primary dataset used for the evaluation of Hakken in biomedical science was made up of information derived from PMC Open Access (full text articles) and MEDLINE (titles and abstracts), together with select licensed data. We describe the relevant extraction and normalization process utilized as part of the processing pipeline at a high level below. 

E.1 Relation extraction 

Relations are extracted from scientific publications using a rule-based relation extrac-tion framework, which transforms unstructured text into normalized semantic triples of the form (head entity, relation type, tail entity). Each triple links two ontology-grounded entities via a predefined semantic relation, with directionality determined by the rule patterns applied. The framework relies on three core components: domain ontologies, rule-based NLP, and multi-level syntactic simplification. First, named entities are identified and mapped to ontology concepts during document indexing (entity linking). The anno-tated text is then converted into structured phrase tokens, enabling the application of rule-based patterns to detect candidate relations. These candidates are refined through multiple processing stages, including sentence simplification, resolution of nested expressions and enumerations, and selection of the most specific applicable relation type. Relation arguments are normalized to canon-ical concept identifiers and semantic roles. Rules are designed to reduce ambiguity, and heuristic filtering is applied to discard structurally incomplete or low-confidence matches, where confidence is computed as a weighted average of the matched pattern reliability and the confidence scores of the participating entities. Negation and spec-ulative statements are currently not included in the data and are acknowledged as a current limitation of this extraction procedure. 

E.2 Ontology construction and versioning 

The ontologies used are created through a practical, iterative process that com-bines trusted external knowledge sources, automation, and expert curation. For each domain, the scope and intended use (such as text mining or semantic search) is defined first, then authoritative sources are selected as starting points—for exam-ple MeSH and MONDO for diseases, UniProt and HGNC for genes and proteins, or ChEBI for materials and substances. Concepts, names, synonyms, and existing hierarchies are automatically ingested and merged where possible, such as merging disease concepts that share the same preferred name across sources, or— in the Chem-istry ontology—automatically assigning millions of compounds to chemical classes like 39 steroids or monoterpenes using structure-based algorithms. A high-level hierarchy is then established to organize concepts from broad categories (e.g. disease of anatomical entity) down to specific entries (e.g. Parkinson’s disease), after which ontology experts manually review and refine the content to resolve ambiguities, remove redundancies, and enrich synonym coverage (for example adding common literature terms or brand names). Where needed, additional semantic relationships beyond simple hierarchies are modeled, such as linking a drug trade name to its active ingredient (e.g. Tylenol →

acetaminophen) or connecting a gene to its protein product (e.g. TP53 → p53). The ontologies are continuously quality-checked, versioned, and updated through regular incremental releases and annual major releases, and are delivered in multiple standard formats so they can be directly applied in text mining, semantic search, and knowledge graph applications. 

E.3 Quality control 

The quality of the underlying extraction pipeline is assessed through a multi-stage evaluation process. For named entity recognition (NER), large-scale statistics are com-puted over a benchmark of approximately 100k PubMed Central Open Access subset (PMC) articles, complemented by targeted manual validation on randomly sampled annotations to verify entity recognition and normalization accuracy. For relation extraction, evaluation is performed in two stages. First, a curated development set of 230 sentences from selected PMC Open Access articles is used for detailed precision analysis. Second, large-scale validation is conducted on a corpus of approximately 10k PMC Open Access articles, where aggregate statistics are com-puted and compared across successive pipeline versions to monitor consistency and improvements over time. As this extraction framework is an established component provided externally and evaluated independently of the present study, we do not include an additional manual audit of sampled triples here. Instead, we rely on the provider’s standardized evaluation procedures and continuous quality monitoring to ensure the consistency and reliability of the dataset used in our experiments. 

E.4 Polarity Conflicts in Source Data 

The data provided showed some polarity conflicts when dealing with relationships containing the keywords AFFECTS, INCREASES, DECREASES. Indeed, several relation- type triplets appeared in conflicting or inconsistent patterns. Expert-guided rules were implemented to reconcile these cases. Illustrative examples and resulting decisions are provided in Table E2. Our data-cleaning strategy comprises four major phases: preliminary expert anal-ysis, domain search, edge cleaning, and node cleaning. A panel of biomedical experts was involved in examining the relation types present in the dataset and prioritiz-ing them—in preparation for the eventual wet-lab validation of hypotheses described below—according to their relevance for drug discovery and genetics/genomics. This analysis was also used to identify opportunities for simplifying relation semantics and to recommend the merging or renaming of low-frequency or ambiguous relation types. 40 Table E2 : Examples and rules used to resolve inconsistencies among AFFECTS , INCREASES , and 

DECREASES .                             

> Scenario Issue Resolution
> Only AFFECTS present (e.g., A affects B @ t1) No inconsistency; base relation already present.
> Do nothing. AFFECTS is kept. Only INCREASES present (e.g., A increases B @ t1) Missing the more general parent rela-tion.
> Add AFFECTS with same times-tamp (t1); keep INCREASES. Only DECREASES present (e.g., A decreases B @ t2) Missing the more general parent rela-tion.
> Add AFFECTS with same times-tamp (t2); keep DECREASES. Both INCREASES and AFFECTS
> present (e.g., A affects B @ t1; A increases B @ t1) No inconsistency; parent + child rela-tion already aligned.
> Do nothing. Both are kept. Both DECREASES and AFFECTS
> present (e.g., A affects B @ t3; A decreases B @ t3) No inconsistency; parent + child rela-tion already aligned.
> Do nothing. Both are kept. Both INCREASES and
> DECREASES present (e.g., Aincreases B @ t1; A decreases B @ t4) Mutually contradictory child relations. A general relation (AFFECTS) is miss-ing.
> Remove INCREASES and DECREASES ,add AFFECTS with the earlier timestamp (t1).

Based on this expert review, we restricted the set of possible relation types occurring in our biomedical dataset and renamed or merged some relations for semantic alignment. The expert selected relations and transformation rules are summarized in Table E3. For the domain search, we used the provided ontology information to obtain more biologically interpretable macro-domains by recursively tracing each entity’s ancestry until the highest-level domain was identified. This procedure resulted in 22 candidate macro-domains. Subsequent edge cleaning included the removal of exact duplicate entries, duplicate triplets with later timestamps (only retaining the earliest occurrence of a triplet), invalid and null entries, and of extremely infrequent relations. Also, based on expert guidance, we resolved relationships appearing in inconsistent or contradic-tory patterns. These are polarity conflicts such as increases vs decreases. In Appendix E we report an example of such cases. The final node cleaning assigns valid domains to entities with missing or inconsistent annotations using the role tag provided with the data. Where an entity’s role corresponded to multiple macro-domains we performed a mapping to the dominant macro-domain based on incoming and outgoing edges. This results in a cleaned dataset containing 254 ,806 entities and 7 ,127 ,960 triples across 23 relation types and 20 macro-domains (as two macro-domains were found to be empty after cleaning). 

# Appendix F Wet-lab validation of hypotheses 

F.1 Wet-lab hypothesis generation 

Generating all possible hypotheses encoded in the knowledge graph would be compu-tationally prohibitive and would hinder the prioritization of candidates for a specific topic to send for wet-lab investigation. Preliminary estimates indicate that exhaustive 41 Table E3 : Relation-type renaming, merging, or removal based on expert review.                                                                                              

> #Original relation Action Transformed relation
> 1INDUCES keep –2IS A BIOMARKER FOR keep –3OF merge into IS A BIOMARKER FOR 4INHIBITS keep –5TREATS keep –6IS TREATED BY swap (s ↔o) TREATS 7USED FOR TREATMENT OF rename to TREATS 8IS DIFFERENTIATED BY keep –9IS A TARGET FOR keep –10 IS A keep IS A 11 METABOLIZES keep METABOLIZES 12 IS METABOLIZED BY swap (s ↔o) METABOLIZES 13 IS METABOLITE OF rename to METABOLIZES 14 CONTAINS keep –15 PREVENTS keep –16 INCREASES DEGRADATION OF keep –17 DECREASES TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVITY OF keep –18 INCREASES TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVITY OF keep –19 AFFECTS TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVITY OF keep –20 INCREASES EXPRESSION OF keep –21 EXPRESSION IS INCREASED IN swap (s ↔o) INCREASES EXPRESSION OF 22 DECREASES EXPRESSION OF keep –23 EXPRESSION IS DECREASED IN swap (s ↔o) DECREASES EXPRESSION OF 24 AFFECTS EXPRESSION OF keep –25 EXPRESSION IS AFFECTED IN swap (s ↔o) AFFECTS EXPRESSION OF 26 INHIBITS GROWTH OF keep –27 INHIBITS PROLIFERATION OF keep –28 DECREASES ABUNDANCE OF keep –29 AFFECTS ABUNDANCE OF keep –30 INCREASES ABUNDANCE OF keep –31 AFFECTS DEGRADATION OF keep –

exploration of all candidate triples would require orders of magnitude more compu-tational time than is practical for iterative experimental cycles. To reduce the search space and retain biological relevance, we restricted predictions to a curated subset of entities. We chose to focus on the topic of ‘aging’ and identify promising hypothesis around this topic. The selection process starts from a compiled list of genes provided by the biomedical experts and associated with the chosen topic. This curated list is available in the Supplementary Information. After receiving the list, we aligned all identifiers to the entity vocabulary used in the knowledge graph to ensure seamless integration. This produced our set of seed nodes. We applied THiGERLLM to predict all potential relations among all pairwise combinations of these nodes. For a total of 1 ,386 entity nodes, this corresponds to 959 ,805 unordered entity pairs. The resulting set consisted of 1 ,543 ,297 above-confidence-threshold hypotheses, which were subsequently prioritised through the selection strategy described below, for expert review and wet-lab evaluation. 42 F.2 Wet-lab hypothesis selection 

The hypothesis-selection pipeline processes the raw predictions produced by the 

THiGERLLM model and yields a refined list of mechanistically plausible hypotheses. Following completion of the pipeline and addition of corresponding explanations from PHELInE, three hypotheses were selected by biomedical experts for wet-lab validation and submitted to an independent Contract Research Organization (CRO). The pipeline consists of five principal stages, each implementing a specific filtering or characterization step, designed to progressively reduce noise and increase the chance to spot promising and novel routes: 1. Preparation: This stage standardizes model output and removes any hypotheses corresponding to edges already present in the reference knowledge graph. 

• Converts raw predictions to a uniform tabular schema. 

• Excludes entity pairs for which a relation is already recorded in the graph, ensuring that only novel hypotheses are considered. 2. Recency characterization: For each entity, we compute a recency score defined as the median publication year associated with that node. The result is used as additional discriminator when reviewed by experts. 3. Top-k entity filtering: To limit the dominance of highly connected entities and ensure a more diverse hypothesis set, we retain only the top-k highest-confidence predictions associated with each entity. In the final pipeline, k = 3 was used. 4. Path-length characterization: For each candidate prediction, we compute the shortest path between the two entities in the reference graph (the graph prior to the predictions). This metric gives an idea of the complexity of the proposed hypothesis and can help an expert eye prioritize a prediction over another. 5. Finalization: The final stage formats the selected hypotheses into standardized output files. Separating this step allows flexible formatting or visualization changes without altering the core logic. Table F4 summarizes the number of hypotheses retained after each filtering stage. 

Table F4 : Filtering statistics for hyothesis selection pipeline.          

> Step Input hypotheses Output hypotheses Notes
> prepare 1,543,297 1,524,046 Removes existing graph relations. filter topk entities 1,524,046 2,804 Top-3 filter applied.

The distribution of shortest path lengths among the final hypotheses is shown in Table F5. Out of the almost 3 ,000 prioritized hypotheses, the biomedical experts chose the three hypotheses with confidence above 0 .8, that are reported in Table F6. 43 Table F5 :Shortest-path-length distribution among final Batch 2 hypothe-ses.      

> Path length Count
> 3104 42,068 5631 61

Table F6 : List of the selected hypotheses for wet-lab validation. E1=entity 1 in the relation, E2=entity 2 in the relation, MPL=minimum path length exisiting between the two entitites.                         

> E1 E2 Relation Recency E1 Recency E2 MPL Confidence
> SOAT1 STAT3 affects transcriptional activity of 2021 2021 –0.84183 RAF1 TNF decreases expression of 2021 2011 –0.83114 TP53 BAMBI affects expression of 2021 2018 –0.85391

F.3 Wet-lab hypothesis validation 

We performed validation experiments of the hypotheses using human cell lines. The three selected hypotheses involved relationships between SOAT1-STAT3, RAF1-TNF, and TP53-BAMBI (Table F7). 

Table F7 : List of the selected hypotheses for wet-lab validation. E1=entity 1 in the relation, E2=entity 2 in the relation.             

> E1 E2 Relation Validation Summary
> SOAT1 STAT3 affects transcriptional activity of Denied RAF1 TNF decreases expression of Supported TP53 BAMBI affects expression of Supported

SOAT1-STAT3 hypothesis 

The hypothesis that SOAT1 activity affects STAT3 transcriptional activity was tested in HepG2 cells. LDL was used to activate SOAT1 activity, and downstream effects on STAT3 phosphorylation and STAT3 mRNA expression were assessed. Cholesterol 44 Fig. F6 : Jess (Simple Western) of STAT3/pSTAT3 under induction of SOAT1. pSTAT3 induction in IL-6 or LDL treated HepG2 lysates at 4 and 24 hours under low serum conditions. HepG2 cells were pre-treated with nevanimibe (0, 0.3, 1 μM) and then stimulated with IL-6 (100 ng/mL) for 4 or 24 hours. Total STAT3 was detected at the expected molecular weight in all treatment conditions. The induction of pSTAT3 was only observed in the presence of IL-6 and not induced by any of the LDL treat-ment conditions. ester (CE) quantification served as an internal control to ensure that SOAT1 activity was effectively modulated. Exposure to LDL in both the absence and presence of serum showed aconcentration-dependent increase in CE levels (1% serum: 10.5, 14.2 μM and 0% serum: 6.7, 10.7 μM with 100 and 200 μg/mL LDL respectively), consistent with SOAT1 activation. Treatment with LDL caused an increase in CE formation which was inhibited by the SOAT1 inhibitor nevanimibe by up to 50% at both 4 and 24 hours. Cholesterol ester levels were slightly higher after 4 hours than 24 hours, with basal CE levels of approximately 5 μM. LDL (100 μg/mL) increased CE approximately 2-fold at both timepoints, and the presence of nevanimibe caused similar inhibition at 300 nM (approximately 20%) for both timepoints. 

STAT3 protein expression under SOAT1 induction. To assess STAT3/pSTAT3 pro-tein levels, Jess (Simple Western) was performed using cell lysates generated with cells grown and treated in low serum conditions (1%). For total STAT3, clear peaks were detected at the expected molecular weight (approximately 90 kDa) in all samples at both 4 and 24 hours, with peak areas ranging from 260,000–500,000. In contrast, pSTAT3 only showed a peak with the positive control (IL-6 stimulation) at both timepoints, which was at the expected molecular weight (79 kDa). Peak area was 45 −50 050 100                         

> Percent Change (%)
> LDL (100 μg) −−−+++IL-6 (100 ng/ml) −+−−−−DMSO −−−+−−Nev −−++ −+++
> 4 h 24 h

Fig. F7 : RT-qPCR of STAT3 under SOAT1 induction. Time-dependent STAT3 expression changes in response to LDL and nevanimibe treatment in HepG2 cells (4 and 24 hours, 1% serum). STAT3 expression levels were compared as a percent change relative to the vehicle control baseline (medium only). IL-6 (100 ng/mL) was included as a positive control for STAT3 induction and showed increased expression at both timepoints. Treatment with LDL failed to significantly alter STAT3 expression levels at either timepoint. Nev: + (300 nM), ++ (1000 nM) approximately 1,000,000, representing a 3.2- and 2.7-fold increase over the correspond-ing basal control for 4 hours and 24 hours respectively. No clear peaks were observed with any of the other treatment conditions (Figure F6). 

STAT3 mRNA expression under SOAT1 induction. To assess any effects of SOAT1 activation on STAT3 at the gene level, STAT3 mRNA expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR. Primer/probe sets for ACTB (selected housekeeping gene) and STAT3 tar-gets were validated using RNA reference standards. Control HepG2 lysate samples exhibited robust expression of ACTB and STAT3, with minimal variation between replicates. Exposure to IL-6 (100 ng/mL) induced an increase in normalized STAT3 expression, with a percentage change of STAT3/ACTB of approximately 60% at 4 hours and 70% at 24 hours. Treatment with LDL at both concentrations and timepoints failed to significantly alter STAT3 expression levels (Figure F7). The results from the hypothesis testing assays demonstrated that stimulation of SOAT1 (via LDL loading of HepG2 cells) failed to demonstrate an effect on STAT3 at the transcription level (no significant change in STAT3 mRNA detected by RT-qPCR) or STAT3 at the protein level (measured by STAT3/pSTAT3 by Jess). In summary, these findings failed to support the hypothesis of a potential link between SOAT1 activity and STAT3 expression or activation (phosphorylation), at least within the current experimental design with HepG2 cells [60]. 46 RAF1-TNF hypothesis 

The hypothesis that RAF1 modulation affects TNF expression was tested in THP-1 cells. RAF1 activity was assessed indirectly using an assay that measured ERK1/2 phosphorylation (pERK1/2), as ERK activation occurs downstream of RAF1 in the MAPK pathway [61]. TNF mRNA expression relative to ACTB was quantified by RT-qPCR, with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) used as a positive control to induce TNF expression and secretion. All experiments were conducted under low serum conditions (1% FBS) to maintain cell viability throughout the assays. The TNF expression was analyzed following treatment with GW5074, a selective inhibitor of RAF1 [62], and AZ 628, a pan-RAF kinase inhibitor [63]. Exposure to 100 ng/mL LPS (positive control) caused a significant increase in normalized TNF expression, with a Log 2 fold change in TNF/ACTB of 4.2 at 4 hours and 5.0 at 24 hours. Treatment with GW5074 at a concentration of 1000 nM caused a smaller, but significant increase in TNF expression at both 4 hour and 24 hour timepoints, with a Log 2 fold change of 1.1 and 1.8, respectively. In contrast, treatment with AZ 628 caused a decrease in TNF expression at the 4 hour timepoint (range: −1.8 to −2.7) which had normalized relative to the baseline control at 24 hours (Figure F8). −4 −2 0246TNF/ACTB (Log 2 fold change) *** *** *** ** *** *** ** LPS (100 ng/μl) − + − − − − − −                

> GW5074 −−+++ +++ −−−
> AZ 628 −−−−−+++ +++
> 4 h 24 h

Fig. F8 : TNF expression in THP-1 cells following treatment with RAF1 inhibitors GW5074 and AZ 628. THP-1 cells (8 × 10 4 per well) were treated for 4 hours or 24 hours with 0.2% DMSO (vehicle control), 100 ng/mL LPS (positive control), or the indicated concentrations of GW5074 (+:10 nM, ++: 100 nM, +++: 1000 nM) or AZ 628 (+:30 nM, ++: 300 nM, +++: 3000 nM) RAF1 inhibitors. TNF expression was normalized to ACTB and presented as Log 2 fold change. Each condition represents n=4 biological replicates; bars represent mean ± SEM. Statistically significant differ-ences compared to the vehicle control are indicated (*p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤

0.001). 47 Conditioned supernatants from the same assay plates were analyzed for any changes in secreted TNF protein levels. Consistent with the mRNA data, stimulation of the THP-1 cells with LPS caused a robust increase in TNF (658 pg/mL). However, the two RAF1 inhibitors did not impact TNF secretion, with all readings below the lower limit of quantification (LLOQ = 15.6 pg/mL). The findings with GW5074 (selective RAF1 inhibitor) supported the proposed hypothesis of a functional relationship between RAF1 modulation and TNF. However, given that the changes in TNF gene expression were only observed at a single GW5074 concentration and were not mirrored at the (secreted) protein level, a confirmatory assay was conducted. In the confirmatory assay, TNF expression was evaluated following the same assay design, but replacing AZ 628 with an alternative RAF1 inhibitor, ZM336372, reported to have greater selectivity for RAF1 [64]. Exposure to 100 ng/mL LPS (positive con-trol) resulted in increased normalized TNF expression at both timepoints (Log 2 fold change of 3.7 and 5.0 at 4 hours and 24 hours, respectively). Consistent with Stage 3 hypothesis assay data, a modest increase (Log 2 fold change of 0.9) in normalized TNF expression was observed at 24 hours after treatment with 1000 nM GW5074, with no change in secreted TNF levels. Analysis of treatment-matched lysates using Jess con-firmed that 1000 nM GW5074 was causing an increase in phosphorylated ERK1/2 protein. Interestingly, a marked increase in pERK1/2 protein levels was also observed with all concentrations of ZM336372 (Figure F9). The increase in ERK phosphorylation upon RAF1 inhibition is consistent with the phenomenon of paradoxical ERK activation, which occurs when inhibitor bind-ing promotes RAF1 dimerization and transactivation, leading to downstream MEK and ERK activation [65]. These findings support the hypothesis of a potential link between RAF1 signaling and TNF expression. The consistent increase in TNF mRNA expression with GW5074 treatment (1000 nM) at 24 hours across both assays, coincid-ing with increased ERK phosphorylation, suggests a functional relationship between RAF1 modulation and TNF regulation [66]. 

TP53-BAMBI hypothesis 

The hypothesis that TP53 affects BAMBI expression was tested in HepG2 cells. Nutlin-3, a small-molecule inhibitor of MDM2, was used to induce P53 protein lev-els, and downstream effects on BAMBI mRNA expression were assessed. TGF β1 was included as a positive control, as BAMBI functions as a non-signaling pseudoreceptor for TGF β1 [67]. In the initial Stage 3 hypothesis test, BAMBI expression was assessed following Nutlin-3 treatment (0.01–10 μM) at a single 24 hour timepoint. Exposure to 10 ng/mL TGF β1 (positive control) resulted in an increase in normalized BAMBI expression at all cell densities (42%, 57%, and 65% at seeding densities of 1 × 10 4, 2 × 10 4,and 4 × 10 4 cells, respectively). An increase in normalized BAMBI expression was also observed with Nutlin-3 treatment. The greatest increase in BAMBI expression occurred with 10 μM Nutlin-3, with relative changes of 33%, 17%, and 23% observed at seeding densities of 1 × 10 4, 2 × 10 4, and 4 × 10 4 cells, respectively (Figure F10). 48 −2 0246TNF/ACTB (Log 2 fold change) ** *** LPS (100 ng/μl) − + − − − − − −                

> GW5074 −−+++ +++ −−−
> ZM 336372 −−−−−+++ +++
> 4 h 24 h

Fig. F9 : TNF expression in THP-1 cells following GW5074 and ZM336372 treatment (confirmatory assay). THP-1 cells (8 × 10 4 per well) were treated for 4 hours or 24 hours with 0.2% DMSO (vehicle control), 100 ng/mL LPS (positive control), or the indicated concentrations of GW5074 (+:10 nM, ++: 100 nM, +++: 1000 nM) or ZM336372 (+:100 nM, ++: 300 nM, +++: 1000 nM) RAF1 inhibitors. Consistent with the initial Stage 3 assay, a modest increase in normalized TNF expression was observed at 24 hours after treatment with 1000 nM GW5074. Each condition represents n=4 biological replicates; bars represent mean ± SEM. Statistically significant differences compared to the vehicle control are indicated (*p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001). Analysis of P53 protein expression in treatment-matched lysates confirmed induc-tion by Nutlin-3, with the highest increase (8.7-fold increase in normalized peak area) also observed at 10 μM. These findings supported the proposed hypothesis of a func-tional relationship between P53 and BAMBI. However, given that the changes in BAMBI expression were modest (17–33%), a Stage 3 confirmatory assay was con-ducted to further evaluate BAMBI expression dynamics over a time-course of Nutlin-3 treatment. In the confirmatory assay, BAMBI expression was evaluated following Nutlin-3 treatment over a time-course with sampling at 8, 16, 24, and 48 hours. Exposure to 10 ng/mL TGF β1 (positive control) resulted in increased normalized BAMBI expression at all timepoints (30%, 13%, 28%, and 213% at 8 hours, 16 hours, 24 hours, and 48 hours, respectively). Consistent with Stage 3 hypothesis assay data, a modest increase (16%) in normalized BAMBI expression was observed at 24 hours after treatment with 10 μM Nutlin-3. This effect became more pronounced at 48 hours, where normalized BAMBI expression increased by 38% compared to the vehicle control (Figure F11). Analysis of treatment-matched lysates using Jess confirmed robust induction of P53 protein, with the highest induction (11-fold increase) occurring with 10 μM Nutlin-3. The time-course analysis also revealed modest decreases in BAMBI expression of up 49 −20 020 40 60 80 100 Percent change of BAMBI/ACTB expression * **** *** **** *Nutlin (μM) − 0.01 0.039 0.156 0.625 2.5 10 −TGFb1 − − − − − − − +

> 10k cells 20k cells 40k cells

Fig. F10 : BAMBI expression changes in response to Nutlin-3 treatment at 24 hours. HepG2 cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of Nutlin-3 for 24 hours. Expression was quantified using the ∆∆Ct method and normalized to ACTB. Data are presented as percentage change relative to the vehicle control baseline (0.2% DMSO). Three initial seeding densities (1, 2, or 4 × 10 4 cells per well) are indicated by bar col-ors. Each condition represents n=3–4 biological replicates; bars show mean ± standard error. TGF β1 (10 ng/mL) was included as a positive control for BAMBI induction. Statistically significant changes compared to the vehicle control are indicated (*p ≤

0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001). to 18% relative to baseline when cells were exposed to lower Nutlin-3 concentrations (0.156–2.5 μM). The consistent increase in BAMBI expression with 10 μM Nutlin-3 treatment at 24 hours across both assays, coinciding with maximal P53 protein induction, supports the hypothesis of a functional relationship between P53 and BAMBI [68]. The time-dependent increase in BAMBI expression, becoming more pronounced at 48 hours, suggests that the effect may be mediated through transcriptional regulation. However, the modest magnitude of the changes (16–38%) and the observation of decreased BAMBI expression at lower Nutlin-3 concentrations suggest a subtle and context-dependent relationship that may require further investigation to fully elucidate. 

F.4 Experimental protocols 

For each selected hypothesis, we designed human cell line experiments to test the hypothesis. 

F.4.1 Equipment 

All equipment used for experimental validation is listed in Table F8. 50 050 100 150 200 250 Percent change of BAMBI/ACTB expression ** *** *** Nutlin (μM) − 0.01 0.039 0.156 0.625 2.5 10 −TGFb1 − − − − − − − +

> 8 h 16 h 24 h 48 h

Fig. F11 : Time-dependent BAMBI expression changes with Nutlin-3 treatment. HepG2 cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of Nutlin-3 for 8, 16, 24, or 48 hours. BAMBI expression was quantified using the ∆∆Ct method and normalized to ACTB. Data are shown as percent change relative to the vehicle control baseline (0.2% DMSO). TGF β1 (10 ng/mL) was included as a positive control for BAMBI induction. Each condition represents n=4 biological replicates; bars show mean ± stan-dard error. The 48-hour TGF β1 treatment exceeded the y-axis range, with a mean percent change of 214% ( ±14%). Statistically significant changes compared to the vehicle control are indicated (*p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001). 

Table F8 : List of equipment used for wet-lab validation.          

> Equipment/Software Name Cat No./ID No./Serial No./Version
> Vac-Man 96 Vacuum Manifold A2291 MiniAmp Thermal Cycler A37834 Quantstudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR System 4485689 Agilent 50 TS Plate Washer S/N 2302141D BioTek Cytation5 S/N 21041316 Gen5 software 3.13.15 Jess Simple Western system JS4787 Compass for Simple Western software 7.0.0

F.4.2 Cell Lines 

All cell lines used for experimental validation are shown in Table F9. 

F.4.3 Cell Culture Reagents 

Cell culture reagents for the SOAT1-STAT3 hypothesis validation are listed in Table F10. 51 Table F9 : List of cell lines used for wet-lab validation.                      

> Hypothesis Cell Line Vendor Catalog No. Morphology Tissue Disease
> SOAT1-STAT3 HepG2 ATCC HB-8065 Epithelial-like Liver Hepatocellular carcinoma TP53-BAMBI HepG2 ATCC HB-8065 Epithelial-like Liver Hepatocellular carcinoma RAF1-TNF THP-1 ATCC TIB-202 Monocyte Peripheral blood Acute monocytic leukemia

Cell culture reagents for the TP53-BAMBI hypothesis validation are listed in Table F11. Cell culture reagents for the RAF1-TNF hypothesis validation are listed in Table F12. 

F.4.4 Methods 

SOAT1-STAT3 Hypothesis 

Cell Culture. HepG2 cells were cultured in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (EMEM) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (PS) according to ATCC recommendations. 

Compound Preparation. Human LDL was stored at 2–8 °C and further diluted as required in low-serum medium. Stock solutions of nevanimibe (10mM) were prepared in 100% DMSO on the first day of use and then stored at -20 °C for subsequent assays. Stocks were further diluted in 100% DMSO and low serum medium. Recombinant IL-6 was reconstituted at 500 μg/mL in sterile water, aliquoted and stored at -20 °C. On the day of the assay, an aliquot was thawed and diluted as required in low-serum medium. 

Hypothesis Test Assay. HepG2 cells were plated in 96-well plates (CE bioassay, RT-qPCR) at a single cell density (4 × 10 4 cells per well) or 6-well plates (Jess) (1 × 10 6

cells per well) in low-serum medium (EMEM supplemented with 1% FBS and 1% PS) and incubated (37 °C and 5% CO 2) overnight. Cells were treated with LDL (100 μg/mL) ± nevanimibe (300, 1000nM), IL-6 (100ng/mL), vehicle control (0.1% DMSO), or medium only for 4 or 24 hours (37 °Cand 5% CO 2). 

Cholesterol/Cholesterol Ester-Glo Assay. The production of cholesterol and choles-terol ester (CE) was measured using a Cholesterol/CE-Glo kit (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s standard protocol. For measuring CE, the assay includes a choles-terol esterase that removes the fatty acid from cholesterol esters to produce a single molecule of cholesterol per molecule of ester. The amount of CE was determined from 52 Table F10 : List of reagents used for SOAT1-STAT3 hypothesis validation. 

Category Reagent Description Vendor Catalog No. 

Cell culture Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) ATCC 30-2003 Cell culture FBS ATCC 30-2020 Cell culture Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ free HBSS Merck (Sigma Aldrich) H6648 Cell culture Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ free PBS Merck (Sigma Aldrich) D8537 Cell culture Penicillin-Streptomycin (100x) Merck (Sigma Aldrich) P4333 Cell culture Recombinant Human IL-6 Fisher Scientific 200-06-50UG Cell culture RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer ThermoFisher 89900 Cell culture Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail ThermoFisher 78420 Cell culture Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (100X) ThermoFisher 87786 Cell culture BCA protein assay kit ThermoFisher (Pierce) 23225 Cell culture Human LDL Kalen Biomedical 770200-4 Cell culture Cholesterol/Cholesterol Ester-Glo Assay Promega J3190 Cell culture Nevanimibe Hydrochloride MedChemExpress HY-10399A Antibody Human Phospho-STAT3(Y705) Bio-Techne (Novus bio-logicals) AF4607 Antibody Stat3 (D1B2J) Cell Signalling Technolo-gies 30835 Antibody ERK1 primary antibody (positive control) Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-486 Antibody Anti-Mouse Secondary HRP antibody Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-205 Antibody Anti-Rabbit Secondary HRP antibody Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-206 Antibody Streptavidin-HRP (for detection of ladder) Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-414 Jess 12-230 KDa Separation Module Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) SM-W004 Jess 12-230 KDa pre-filled microplate Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 30-2020 Jess 10x sample buffer Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-195 Jess Biotinylated ladder (12-230 KDa) Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) PS-ST01EZ-8 Jess DTT Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) PS-ST01EZ-8 Jess Fluorescent 5X Master Mix Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) PS-ST01EZ-8 Jess Hela lysate (assay control) Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-488 Jess Luminol Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 043-311 Jess Peroxide Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 043-379 Jess Antibody Diluent 2 Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-203 Jess Wash buffer Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-202 Genomics SV 96 Total RNA Isolation System Promega Z3500 Genomics DNase 1 ThermoFisher 18068015 Genomics High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcrip-tion Kit ThermoFisher 4368813 Genomics TaqMan Universal PCR Master ThermoFisher (Applied Biosystems) 4304437 Genomics ACTB ( β-actin) Primer/Probe set ThermoFisher Hs01060665 g1 Genomics STAT3 Primer/Probe set ThermoFisher Hs00374280 m1 Genomics Universal Human Reference RNA ThermoFisher QS0639 Genomics TE Buffer (1x TE solution, pH 8.0) IDT 11-05-01-13 

53 Table F11 : List of reagents used for TP53-BAMBI hypothesis validation. 

Category Reagent Description Vendor Catalog No. 

Cell culture Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) ATCC 30-2003 Cell culture FBS ATCC 30-2020 Cell culture Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ free HBSS Merck (Sigma Aldrich) H6648 Cell culture Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ free PBS Merck (Sigma Aldrich) D8537 Cell culture Penicillin-Streptomycin (100x) Merck (Sigma Aldrich) P4333 Cell culture Transforming growth factor-β1 R&D systems 240-B-002 Cell culture Nutlin-3 Bio-Techne 3984 Cell culture RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer ThermoFisher 89900 Cell culture Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail ThermoFisher 78420 Cell culture Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (100X) ThermoFisher 87786 Cell culture BCA protein assay kit ThermoFisher (Pierce) 23225 Antibody P53 antibody Bio-Techne (Novus bio-logicals) NBP2-29453 Antibody ERK1 primary antibody (positive control) Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-486 Antibody Anti-Mouse Secondary HRP antibody Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-205 Antibody Anti-Rabbit Secondary HRP antibody Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-206 Antibody Streptavidin-HRP (for detection of ladder) Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-414 Jess 12-230 KDa Separation Module Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) SM-W004 Jess 12-230 KDa pre-filled microplate Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 30-2020 Jess 10x sample buffer Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-195 Jess Biotinylated ladder (12-230 KDa) Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) PS-ST01EZ-8 Jess DTT Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) PS-ST01EZ-8 Jess Fluorescent 5X Master Mix Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) PS-ST01EZ-8 Jess Hela lysate (assay control) Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-488 Jess Luminol Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 043-311 Jess Peroxide Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 043-379 Jess Antibody Diluent 2 Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-203 Jess Wash buffer Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) 042-202 Jess Protein normalisation module Bio-Techne (ProteinSim-ple) DM-PN02 Genomics SV 96 Total RNA Isolation System Promega Z3500 Genomics DNase 1 ThermoFisher 18068015 Genomics High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcrip-tion Kit ThermoFisher 4368813 Genomics TaqMan Universal PCR Master ThermoFisher (Applied Biosystems) 4304437 Genomics ACTB ( β-actin) Primer/Probe set ThermoFisher Hs01060665 g1 Genomics BAMBI Primer/Probe set ThermoFisher Hs03044164 m1 Genomics Universal Human Reference RNA ThermoFisher QS0639 Genomics TE Buffer (1x TE solution, pH 8.0) IDT 11-05-01-13 

54 Table F12 : List of reagents used for RAF1-TNF hypothesis validation. 

Category Reagent Description Vendor Catalog No. 

Cell culture RPMI-1640 medium ATCC 30-2001 Cell culture FBS ATCC 30-2020 Cell culture 2-Mercaptoethanol Fisher 11508916 Cell culture Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ free HBSS Merck (Sigma Aldrich) H6648 Cell culture Penicillin-Streptomycin (100x) Merck (Sigma Aldrich) P4333 Cell culture Lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia coli 

O127:B8 (LPS) Merck L4516 Cell culture GW5074 Biotechne 1381 Cell culture AZ 628 Biotechne 4836 Cell culture ZM336372 Fisher HY13343 Cell culture RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer ThermoFisher 89900 Cell culture Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail ThermoFisher 78420 Cell culture Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (100X) ThermoFisher 87786 Cell culture BCA protein assay kit ThermoFisher (Pierce) 23225 Genomics SV 96 Total RNA Isolation System Promega Z3500 Genomics DNase 1 ThermoFisher 18068015 Genomics High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcrip-tion Kit ThermoFisher 4368813 Genomics TaqMan Universal PCR Master ThermoFisher (Applied Biosystems) 4304437 Genomics ACTB ( β-actin) Primer/Probe set ThermoFisher Hs01060665 g1 Genomics TNF α Primer/Probe set ThermoFisher Hs00174128 m1 Genomics Universal Human Reference RNA ThermoFisher QS0639 Genomics TE Buffer (1x TE solution, pH 8.0) IDT 11-05-01-13 

the difference of cholesterol measured in the absence (free cholesterol) and presence (total cholesterol) of esterase. Samples were analyzed neat or at a single dilution (1:2) in duplicate or triplicate wells for total and free cholesterol. The protocol used is summarized as follows: 1. Medium removed and cells washed twice with 100 μL PBS 2. Cholesterol lysis solution (50 μL) added per well. Plate shaken briefly and incubated for 30 minutes at 37 °C3. A cholesterol standard curve was prepared using the kit provided 20mM cholesterol standard (0 μM–80 μM) 4. If needed, samples were diluted 1:2 with cholesterol lysis solution 5. Samples, standards or background controls (50 μL) transferred to a 96-well white-walled plate 6. Cholesterol detection reagent (50 μL) with or without esterase added to all wells. Plate shaken briefly for 30–60 seconds at a low rpm on a plate shaker and then incubated at room temperature for 1 hour 7. Luminescence measured using a plate reader (Cytation5) 8. Free and total cholesterol was calculated by comparison of the luminescence of samples and standards assayed under the same conditions 55 TP53-BAMBI Hypothesis 

Cell Culture. HepG2 cells were cultured in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (EMEM) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (PS) according to ATCC recommendations. 

Compound Preparation. Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF β1) was reconsti-tuted at 20 μg/mL in 4mM HCl + 1mg/mL BSA, aliquoted and stored at -20 °C. On the day of the assay, an aliquot was thawed and diluted as required in low-serum medium. A 10mM stock of Nutlin-3 in 100% DMSO was prepared fresh on the day of each assay and diluted as required in low serum medium. 

Hypothesis Test Assay. HepG2 cells were plated in 96-well plates (RT-qPCR) (4 ×

10 4 cells per well) or 6-well plates (Jess) (1 × 10 6 cells per well) in low-serum medium (EMEM supplemented with 1% FBS and 1% PS) and incubated (37 °C and 5% CO 2)overnight. Cells were then treated with Nutlin-3 (0.01–10 μM), TGF β1 (10ng/mL), vehicle control (0.2% DMSO), or medium only (6-well plates only). The 96-well plates were incubated for 8, 16, 24 or 48 hours, and the 6-well plates for 24 hours (37 °C and 5% CO 2). 

RAF1-TNF Hypothesis 

Cell Culture. THP1 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (PS) and 0.05mM beta-mercaptoethanol (BME) according to ATCC recommendations. 

Compound Preparation. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was reconstituted at 1mg/mL in sterile PBS, aliquoted and stored at -20 °C. On the day of the assay, an aliquot was thawed and diluted as required in low-serum medium. Stock solutions of GW5074 (10mM), ZM336372 (30mM), and AZ628 (10mM) were prepared in 100% DMSO fresh on the day of each assay and diluted as required in low serum medium. 

Hypothesis Test Assay. THP-1 were plated in 96-well plates (RT-qPCR) (8 × 10 4

cells per well) or transferred to 15mL falcon tubes (Jess) (4 × 10 6 cells per tube) in low-serum medium (RPMI-1640 + 1% FBS + 1% PS + 0.05mM BME) and allowed to equilibrate for 4 hours (37 °C and 5% CO 2). Cells were treated with GW5074 (10, 100, or 1000nM), ZM336372 (100, 300, or 1000nM), LPS (100ng/mL), or vehicle control (0.2% DMSO). The 96-well plates were incubated for 4 or 24 hours, and the tubes for 30 minutes (37 °C and 5% CO 2). 

Common Assay Methods 

Lysate Preparation. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS (0.5mL per well for 6-well plates, 1mL per well for THP-1 experiments). Cold RIPA buffer (100 μL per well) supplemented with Halt protease and phos-phatase inhibitors was then added and the plates kept on ice for 10 minutes (HepG2) or 15 minutes (THP-1). 56 The lysed cells were transferred to a microcentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 14,000 

× g for 10 minutes at 4 °C to pellet cell debris. The supernatant was then transferred to a new tube and stored at -80 °C pending analysis. 

BCA Assay. Total protein concentration was determined using the Pierce TM BCA protein assay kit and the microplate procedure. All samples were analyzed at a single (1:10) dilution in triplicate wells. Absorbance was measured at 562nm using a BioTek Cytation5 cell imaging multi-mode reader and blank-corrected absorbance measurements of the unknowns interpolated from the standard curve. 

Jess Capillary Electrophoresis. All lysate samples were analyzed on 12-230 KDa Separation Modules under denaturing conditions with chemiluminescence detection. 

SOAT1-STAT3 Hypothesis: The expression of STAT3 and pSTAT3 (Y705) was determined by capillary electrophoresis (Bio-techne Simple Western, Jess). An optimal protein concentration (total STAT3 = 0.08mg/mL, pSTAT3 = 2mg/mL) and antibody concentration (total STAT3 = 1.4 μg/mL; pSTAT3 = 20 μg/mL) were used. 

TP53-BAMBI Hypothesis: The expression of P53 was determined by capillary electrophoresis (Bio-techne Simple Western, Jess). An optimal protein concentration (1.2mg/mL) and P53 antibody concentration (10 μg/mL) were used. Assay and antibody controls were included for all Jess runs (e.g., Biotinylated ladder, Hela lysate + ERK1 antibody, no primary, and no sample controls). The Jess protocol used is summarized in brief below: 1. Prepare Standard Pack Reagents (DTT, Fluorescent 5X Master Mix, & Biotiny-lated ladder) 2. Prepare cell lysate dilutions using 0.1X Sample Buffer 3. Add Fluorescent 5X Master Mix to each lysate sample 4. Prepare a no sample control (Fluorescent 5X Master Mix + 0.1X Sample Buffer only) 5. Prepare the antibody dilutions using Antibody Diluent 2 6. Denature the lysate samples @ 95 °C for 5 minutes, vortex, spin, and store on ice 7. Stage 3 only (TP53-BAMBI)–prepare the protein normalization reagent (50 μLstock + 250 μL reconstitution agent) 8. Dispense the samples, reagents and wash buffer into the microplate 9. Centrifuge the plate for 5 minutes @ 1000 × g at RT 10. Load plate into the Jess and start assay run (primary antibody incubation time: 30 minutes) The peak areas of named peaks were calculated using the Jess Compass for Simple Western Software (peak fit = dropped lines (manual) and baseline type = spline). For Stage 3 assays with protein normalization (TP53-BAMBI), peak area data were corrected for total protein loading. 

Primer Probe Validation. Primer/probe sets for ACTB ( β-actin) and target genes (BAMBI for TP53-BAMBI, STAT3 for SOAT1-STAT3, TNF α for RAF1-TNF) were 57 validated by RT-qPCR using 10 ng and 100 ng of Universal Human Reference RNA as input. ACTB and TNF α (RAF1-TNF only) were further evaluated by qPCR analysis using in-house oligonucleotide standards corresponding to the ACTB and TNF α

sequence regions shown below. A 10-fold serial dilution was prepared in 1 × TE buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0; 0.1 M EDTA), covering an input range from 10 8 copies to 10 1

copies. ACTB oligonucleotide: 

CCTCGCCTTTGCCGATCCGCCGCCCGTCCACACCCGCCGCCAGCTCACCATGGATGATGAT ATCGCCGCGCTCGTCGTCGACAACGGCTCCGGCATGTGCAAGGCCGGCTTCGCGGGCGACG ATGCCCCCCGGGCCGTCTTCCCCTCCATCGTGGGGCGCCCCAGGCACCAGGGCGTGATGGT GGGCATGGGTCAGAAG 

TNF α oligonucleotide: 

CTCGAACCCCGAGTGACAAGCCTGTAGCCCATGTTGTAGCAAACCCTCAAGCTGAGGGGCA GCTCCAGTGGCTGAACCGCCGGGCCAATGCCCTCCTGGCCAATGGCGTGGAGCTGAGAGAT AACCAGCTGGTGGTGCCATCAGAGGGCCTGTACCTCATCTACTCCCAGGTCCTCTTCAAGG GCC 

RNA Extraction. Cells were washed (1 × HBSS), lysed with RLA buffer + 1% beta-mercaptoethanol (100 μL per well) and the plate was stored at -80 °C pending RNA extraction. RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s instructions using the Promega SV 96 Total RNA Isolation System in combination with a Vac-Man 96 Vacuum Manifold. Purified RNA was eluted in nuclease-free water (100 μL). 

RT-qPCR. Purified RNA was treated with DNase I according to the manufacturer’s protocol and heat-inactivated at 65 °C for 10 minutes using a MiniAmp Thermal Cycler. Reverse transcription was performed using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcrip-tion Kit on a MiniAmp Thermal Cycler with the following program: 25 °C for 10 minutes, 37 °C for 2 hours, 85 °C for 5 minutes, and 4 °C for 10 minutes. qPCR reactions were prepared using the TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix with primer/probe sets for ACTB and BAMBI (TP53-BAMBI), STAT3 (SOAT1-STAT3), or TNF α (RAF1-TNF). Amplification and detection were performed on a QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR System under the following thermocycling conditions: 50 °C for 2 minutes, 95 °C for 10 minutes; 40 cycles of: 95 °C for 15 seconds and 60 °C for 1 minute. 

TP53-BAMBI Hypothesis: Relative expression of BAMBI was calculated against the ACTB housekeeping gene using the ∆∆Ct method. Outliers were identified using Grubbs’ test at α = 0.05. A replicate was removed if its G statistic exceeded the critical value (1.15 for n = 3 or 1.48 for n = 4). Treatment conditions for Stage 3 qPCR assays were statistically compared using Student’s t-test. 

SOAT1-STAT3 Hypothesis: Relative expression of STAT3 was calculated against the ACTB housekeeping gene using the ∆∆Ct method. Outliers were identified using Grubbs’ test at α = 0.05. A replicate was removed if its G statistic exceeded the critical value (1.15 for n = 3 or 1.48 for n = 4). Treatment conditions for Stage 3 qPCR assays were statistically compared using Student’s t-test. 

58 RAF1-TNF Hypothesis: TNF α and ACTB transcript levels were quantified by RT-qPCR using reference standards for each target. Fold changes in TNF α expression normalized rela-tive to ACTB were calculated for each condition. Outliers were identified using Grubbs’ test at α = 0.05. A replicate was removed if its G statistic exceeded the critical value (1.15 for n = 3 or 1.48 for n = 4). Treatment conditions for qPCR assays were statistically compared using Student’s t-test. 

# References 

[1] White, K.: Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons — NSF - National Science Foundation — ncses.nsf.gov. https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/ nsb20214. [Accessed 12-March-2026] (2021) [2] Bhasuran, B., Murugesan, G., Natarajan, J.: Literature Based Discovery (LBD): Towards Hypothesis Generation and Knowledge Discovery in Biomedical Text Mining (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03766 [3] Alkan, A.K., Sourav, S., Jablonska, M., Astarita, S., Chakrabarty, R., Garuda, N., Khetarpal, P., Pi´ oro, M., Tanoglidis, D., Iyer, K.G., Polimera, M.S., Smith, M.J., Ghosal, T., Huertas-Company, M., Kruk, S., Schawinski, K., Ciuc˘ a, I.: A Survey on Hypothesis Generation for Scientific Discovery in the Era of Large Language Models (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.05496 [4] Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M., Ronneberger, O., Tunyasuvunakool, K., Bates, R., ˇZ´ ıdek, A., Potapenko, A., et al. : Highly accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold. nature 596 (7873), 583–589 (2021) [5] Merchant, A., Batzner, S., Schoenholz, S.S., Aykol, M., Cheon, G., Cubuk, E.D.: Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature 624 (7990), 80–85 (2023) [6] Longa, A., Lachi, V., Santin, G., Bianchini, M., Lepri, B., Lio, P., Scarselli, F., Passerini, A.: Graph neural networks for temporal graphs: State of the art, open challenges, and opportunities. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 2023 (2023) [7] Akujuobi, U., Kumari, P., Choi, J., Badreddine, S., Maruyama, K., Palaniappan, S.K., Besold, T.R.: Link prediction for hypothesis generation: an active cur-riculum learning infused temporal graph-based approach. Artificial Intelligence Review 57 (9), 244 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-024-10885-1 . Accessed 2026-02-27 [8] Platt, J.: Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons to regularized likelihood methods. (1999). 

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:56563878 

[9] Zadrozny, B., Elkan, C.P.: Obtaining calibrated probability estimates from deci-sion trees and naive bayesian classifiers. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (2001). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9594071 

59 [10] Hamilton, W.L., Ying, Z., Leskovec, J.: Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4–9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 1024–1034 (2017). 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/5dd9db5e033da9c6fb5ba83c7a7ebea9-Abstract.html 

[11] Dao, T., Fu, D.Y., Ermon, S., Rudra, A., R’e, C.: Flashattention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness. ArXiv abs/2205.14135 

(2022) [12] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (2017). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13756489 

[13] Nickel, M., Murphy, K.P., Tresp, V., Gabrilovich, E.: A review of relational machine learning for knowledge graphs. Proceedings of the IEEE 104 , 11–33 (2015) [14] Barab´ asi, A.-L., Oltvai, Z.N.: Network biology: understanding the cell’s functional organization. Nature Reviews Genetics 5, 101–113 (2004) [15] Peng, C., Xia, F., Naseriparsa, M., Osborne, F.: Knowledge graphs: Opportunities and challenges. Artificial Intelligence Review, 1–32 (2023) [16] Lonardi, A., Badreddine, S., Besold, T.R., Martin, P.S.: Unifying post-hoc explanations of knowledge graph completions. ArXiv abs/2507.22951 (2025) [17] Singhal, K., Azizi, S., Tu, T., Mahdavi, S.S., Wei, J., Chung, H.W., Scales, N., Tanwani, A., Cole-Lewis, H., Pfohl, S., et al. : Large language models encode clinical knowledge. Nature 620 (7972), 172–180 (2023) [18] Saab, K., Tu, T., Weng, W.-H., Tanno, R., Stutz, D., Wulczyn, E., Zhang, F., Strother, T., Park, C., Vedadi, E., et al.: Capabilities of gemini models in medicine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18416 (2024) [19] Tian, S., Jin, Q., Yeganova, L., Lai, P.-T., Zhu, Q., Chen, X., Yang, Y., Chen, Q., Kim, W., Comeau, D.C., et al. : Opportunities and challenges for chatgpt and large language models in biomedicine and health. Briefings in Bioinformatics 

25 (1), 493 (2024) [20] Trouillon, T., Welbl, J., Riedel, S., Gaussier, E., Bouchard, G.: Complex Embed-dings for Simple Link Prediction. arXiv. arXiv:1606.06357 [cs] (2016). https:// doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1606.06357 . http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06357 Accessed 2026-02-27 [21] Singer, U., Guy, I., Radinsky, K.: Node Embedding over Temporal Graphs. In: 60 Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4605–4612. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelli-gence Organization, Macao, China (2019). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/ 640 . https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2019/640 Accessed 2026-02-27 [22] Wei, C.-H., Allot, A., Lai, P.-T., Leaman, R., Tian, S., Luo, L., Jin, Q., Wang, Z., Chen, Q., Lu, Z.: Pubtator 3.0: an ai-powered literature resource for unlocking biomedical knowledge. Nucleic Acids Research 52 (W1), 540–546 (2024) [23] Ferreira, L.L.G., Andricopulo, A.D.: Admet modeling approaches in drug discov-ery. Drug Discovery Today 24 (5), 1157–1165 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1016/j. drudis.2019.03.015 [24] Zhou, Y., Liu, H., Srivastava, T., Mei, H., Tan, C.: Hypothesis generation with large language models. In: Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on NLP for Science (NLP4Science), pp. 117–139 (2024) [25] Baek, J., Jauhar, S.K., Cucerzan, S., Hwang, S.J.: Researchagent: Iterative research idea generation over scientific literature with large language models. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6709–6738 (2025) [26] Gottweis, J., Weng, W.-H., Daryin, A., Tu, T., Palepu, A., Sirkovic, P., Myaskovsky, A., Weissenberger, F., Rong, K., Tanno, R., Saab, K., Popovici, D., Blum, J., Zhang, F., Chou, K., Hassidim, A., Gokturk, B., Vahdat, A., Kohli, P., Matias, Y., Carroll, A., Kulkarni, K., Tomasev, N., Guan, Y., Dhillon, V., Vaish-nav, E.D., Lee, B., Costa, T.R.D., Penad´ es, J.R., Peltz, G., Xu, Y., Pawlosky, A., Karthikesalingam, A., Natarajan, V.: Towards an AI co-scientist (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18864 [27] Lu, C., Lu, C., Lange, R.T., Foerster, J., Clune, J., Ha, D.: The ai scien-tist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 (2024) [28] Xiong, G., Xie, E., Williams, C., Kim, M., Shariatmadari, A.H., Guo, S., Bekiranov, S., Zhang, A.: Toward Reliable Scientific Hypothesis Generation: Evaluating Truthfulness and Hallucination in Large Language Models (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.14599 [29] Ashburner, M., Ball, C.A., Blake, J.A., Botstein, D., Butler, H., Cherry, J.M., Davis, A.P., Dolinski, K., Dwight, S.S., Eppig, J.T., Harris, M.A., Hill, D.P., Issel-Tarver, L., Kasarskis, A., Lewis, S., Matese, J.C., Richardson, J.E., Ringwald, M., Rubin, G.M., Sherlock, G.: Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. Nature Genetics 25 (1), 25–29 (2002) https://doi.org/10.1038/75556 [30] Ristoski, P., Paulheim, H.: Rdf2vec: Rdf graph embeddings for data mining. 61 Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 498–514 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-319-46523-4 30 [31] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J.: Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. In: International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (2013). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5959482 

[32] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, Decem-ber 4–9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 5998–6008 (2017). 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html 

[33] Fernando, K.R.M., Tsokos, C.P.: Dynamically weighted balanced loss: Class imbalanced learning and confidence calibration of deep neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 33 (7), 2940–2951 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2020.3047335 [34] Lin, T., Goyal, P., Girshick, R.B., He, K., Doll´ ar, P.: Focal loss for dense object detection. In: IEEE International Conference on Com-puter Vision (ICCV), Venice, Italy, October 22–29, 2017, pp. 2999–3007. IEEE Computer Society, ??? (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.324 . 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.324 

[35] Zeng, S.: Link prediction based on local information considering preferential attachment. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 443 , 537–542 (2016) [36] Sybrandt, J., Tyagin, I., Shtutman, M., Safro, I.: AGATHA: Automatic Graph Mining And Transformer based Hypothesis Generation Approach. In: Proceed-ings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. CIKM ’20, pp. 2757–2764. Association for Computing Machin-ery, New York, NY, USA (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3340531.3412684 . 

https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3340531.3412684 Accessed 2026-02-27 [37] Huang, Q., Yamada, M., Tian, Y., Singh, D., Yin, D., Chang, Y.: Graphlime: Local interpretable model explanations for graph neural networks. IEEE Trans-actions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 35 , 6968–6972 (2020) [38] Ying, R., Bourgeois, D., You, J., Zitnik, M., Leskovec, J.: Gnnexplainer: Gen-erating explanations for graph neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 , 9240–9251 (2019) [39] Luo, D., Cheng, W., Xu, D., Yu, W., Zong, B., Chen, H., Zhang, X.: Parameter-ized explainer for graph neural network. ArXiv abs/2011.04573 (2020) 62 [40] Yuan, H., Yu, H., Wang, J., Li, K., Ji, S.: On explainability of graph neural networks via subgraph explorations. In: Meila, M., Zhang, T. (eds.) Proceed-ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 139, pp. 12241–12252. PMLR, ??? (2021). 

http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/yuan21c.html 

[41] Lucic, A., Hoeve, M., Tolomei, G., Rijke, M., Silvestri, F.: Cf-gnnexplainer: Counterfactual explanations for graph neural networks. In: Inter-national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (2021). 

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231839528 

[42] Bajaj, M., Chu, L., Xue, Z., Pei, J., Wang, L., Lam, P.C.-H., Zhang, Y.: Robust counterfactual explanations on graph neural networks. In: Neural Information Processing Systems (2021). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235790538 

[43] Kosan, M., Huang, Z., Medya, S., Ranu, S., Singh, A.K.: Global counterfac-tual explainer for graph neural networks. Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (2022) [44] Zhao, D., Wan, G., Zhan, Y., Wang, Z., Ding, L., Zheng, Z., Du, B.: Ke-x: Towards subgraph explanations of knowledge graph embedding based on knowledge information gain. Knowl. Based Syst. 278 , 110772 (2023) [45] Betz, P., Meilicke, C., Stuckenschmidt, H.: Adversarial explanations for knowl-edge graph embeddings. In: Raedt, L.D. (ed.) Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22, pp. 2820–2826. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Orga-nization, ??? (2022). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/391 . Main Track. 

https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/391 

[46] Arakelyan, E., Daza, D., Minervini, P., Cochez, M.: Complex query answering with neural link predictors. In: International Conference on Learning Represen-tations (2021). https://openreview.net/forum?id=Mos9F9kDwkz 

[47] Sadeghian, A., Armandpour, M., Ding, P., Wang, D.Z.: DRUM: End-To-End Differentiable Rule Mining On Knowledge Graphs. In: Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., Alch´ e-Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., ??? (2019) [48] Zhang, W., Paudel, B., Wang, L., Chen, J., Zhu, H., Zhang, W., Bernstein, A., Chen, H.: Iteratively Learning Embeddings and Rules for Knowledge Graph Reasoning. In: The World Wide Web Conference. WWW ’19, pp. 2366–2377. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2019). https://doi. org/10.1145/3308558.3313612 . https://doi.org/10.1145/3308558.3313612 

[49] Pezeshkpour, P., Tian, Y., Singh, S.: Investigating Robustness and Interpretabil-ity of Link Prediction via Adversarial Modifications. In: Burstein, J., Doran, 63 C., Solorio, T. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Ameri-can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 3336–3347. Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota (2019). https://doi.org/10. 18653/v1/N19-1337 . https://aclanthology.org/N19-1337 

[50] Zhang, H., Zheng, T., Gao, J., Miao, C., Su, L., Li, Y., Ren, K.: Data Poisoning Attack against Knowledge Graph Embedding. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-19, pp. 4853–4859. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intel-ligence Organization, ??? (2019). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/674 .

https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/674 

[51] Gu, P., Shen, Y., Wang, L., Wang, Q., Wu, H., Mao, Z.: IAEval: A Comprehen-sive Evaluation of Instance Attribution on Natural Language Understanding. In: Bouamor, H., Pino, J., Bali, K. (eds.) Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 11966–11977. Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore (2023). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp. 801 . https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.801/ 

[52] Bhardwaj, P., Kelleher, J., Costabello, L., O’Sullivan, D.: Adversarial Attacks on Knowledge Graph Embeddings via Instance Attribution Methods. In: Moens, M.-F., Huang, X., Specia, L., Yih, S.W.-t. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8225– 8239. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic (2021). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.648 . 

https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.648 

[53] Rossi, A., Firmani, D., Merialdo, P., Teofili, T.: Explaining Link Prediction Systems based on Knowledge Graph Embeddings. In: Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Management of Data. SIGMOD ’22, pp. 2062– 2075. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2022). https: //doi.org/10.1145/3514221.3517887 . https://doi.org/10.1145/3514221.3517887 

[54] Barile, R., d’Amato, C., Fanizzi, N.: Additive Counterfactuals for Explaining Link Predictions on Knowledge Graphs. In: Alam, M., Rospocher, M., Erp, M., Hollink, L., Gesese, G.A. (eds.) Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management, pp. 346–363. Springer, Cham (2024) [55] Ma, T., song, X., Tao, W., Li, M., Zhang, J., Pan, X., Lin, J., Song, B., Zeng: KGExplainer: Towards Exploring Connected Subgraph Explanations for Knowledge Graph Completion (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03893 [56] Chang, H., Ye, J., Lopez-Avila, A., Du, J., Li, J.: Path-based explana-tion for knowledge graph completion. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. KDD ’24, pp. 231–242. ACM, ??? (2024). https://doi.org/10.1145/3637528.3671683 .64 http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3637528.3671683 

[57] Huang, K., Chandak, P., Wang, Q., Havaldar, S., Vaid, A., Leskovec, J., Nad-karni, G.N., Glicksberg, B.S., Gehlenborg, N., Zitnik, M.: A foundation model for clinician-centered drug repurposing. Nature Medicine (2024) https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41591-024-03233-x [58] Zhang, S., Zhang, J., Song, X., Adeshina, S., Zheng, D., Faloutsos, C., Sun, Y.: Page-link: Path-based graph neural network explanation for het-erogeneous link prediction. In: Proceedings of the ACM Web Confer-ence 2023. WWW ’23, pp. 3784–3793. Association for Computing Machin-ery, New York, NY, USA (2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3543507.3583511 . 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3543507.3583511 

[59] Hamilton, W.L., Ying, R., Leskovec, J.: Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., ??? (2017) [60] Bairos, J.A., et al. : Sterol o-acyltransferase (soat/acat) activity is required to form cholesterol crystals in hepatocyte lipid droplets. BBA-Molecular and Cell Biology Lipids 1869 , 159512 (2024) [61] Molina, J.R., Adjei, A.A.: The ras/raf/mapk pathway. J. Thorac. Oncol. 1(1), 7–9 (2006) [62] Bioscience, T.: GW5074 [Product datasheet]. Available at: https://documents. tocris.com/pdfs/tocris coa/4836 1 coa.pdf (2016) [63] MedChemExpress: Product data sheet: AZ-628 (Catalog No. HY-11004). Avail-able at: https://file.medchemexpress.com/batch PDF/HY-11004/ (2025) [64] MedChemExpress: Product data sheet: ZM-336372 (Catalog No. HY-13343). Available at: https://file.medchemexpress.com/batch PDF/HY-13343/ (2025) [65] Callahan, M.K., Masters, G., Pratilas, C.A., Ariyan, C., Katz, J., et al. : Paradox-ical activation of t cells via augmented erk signaling mediated by a raf inhibitor. Cancer Immunol. Res. 2(1), 70–79 (2014) [66] Parameswaran, N., Patial, S.: Tumour necrosis factor-α signaling in macrophages. Crit. Rev. Eukaryot. Gene Expr. 20 (2), 87–103 (2010) [67] Sekiya, T., Oda, T., Matsuura, K., Akiyama, T.: Transcriptional regulation of the tgf-β pseudoreceptor bambi by tgf-β signaling. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 

320 , 680–684 (2004) [68] Solyakov, L., Sayan, E., Riley, J., Pointon, A., Tobin, A.B.: Regulation of p53 expression, phosphorylation and subcellular localization by a g-protein-coupled 65 receptor. Oncogene 28 , 3619–3630 (2009) 66