Title: Rethinking Logic Optimization Operators: Theory-Derived Operator Compression via Agentic Source Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.23672v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 01:26:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Rethinking Logic Optimization Operators: Theory-Derived Operator Compression via Agentic Source Analysis 

Keren Zhu 

College of Integrated Circuits and Nano-Micro Electronics State Key Laboratory of Integrated Chips and System Fudan University, Shanghai, China krzhu@fudan.edu.cn 

Abstract —Logic synthesis has evolved from compact two-level minimization to large multilevel flows with many interacting optimization operators. Recent work has invested substantial effort in sequencing these operators: actions are commonly treated as opaque choices in a rapidly expanding search space, while learned circuit representations and heuristic or local-greedy orchestration provide increasingly informed ways to explore it. A central obstacle is the operator vocabulary itself. Production operators are numerous, span different representations and mathematical foundations, and expose behaviors determined by implementation-level guards, bounds, and update order. We address this gap through agentic source analysis, using LLM agents to formulate operator-level relations from pinned ABC and mockturtle implementations and adversarial audits to test their stated scope. The resulting certified relations yield theory-derived operator compression: 40 deployed recipe actions collapse to a 31-action exact Pareto cover, and source-level con-ditions compile into deterministic admission gates. We integrate these gates directly into ABC Orchestrate to form TACO . Two exact gates reduce Orchestrate runtime by 11% with bit-identical outputs on 66 circuits. In a held-fixed integrated comparison, 

TACO uses fewer nodes on 14 of 16 circuits, with geometric-mean reductions of 1.0% in nodes and 3.2% in levels, while running 

2.6× faster. TACO -max achieves an NDP geometric-mean ratio of 0.903 on HeLO’s three exact-input rows. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Optimization concerns both the transformations a system can perform and the possibilities worth considering. As logic synthesis has accumulated representations, operators, and scales of decision, that second question has become increasingly central. Logic optimization did not begin as an operator-selection problem. In classical two-level synthesis, the representation and its minimization problem were closely aligned: algo-rithms optimized an explicit Boolean cover within a shared form [1]. The move to multilevel networks replaced that compact decision object with factored DAGs whose quality depends on interacting local transformations [2], [3]. DAG-aware rewriting, don’t-care-based resubstitution, exact synthe-sis, reconvergence-driven windows, and simulation enlarged what each local step could see or attempt [4], [5], [6], [7], 

Code and data: https://github.com/CODA-Team/TACO 

(a) Concrete source-level quotient 

WØ WØ bal rf xcf 

xag_script 

31 

one-recipe cover 

(b) From proof objects to TACO 

Layer 1: universal, state-independent 

identities · aliases · nested variants 

Layer 2: state-conditional predicates 

exact core trajectory-preserving 

Tier-2 boundary gates registered residuals 

> TACO

-skip 

> 2 exact gates
> plug-in for other optimizers

Dynamic residue 

mixed-fiber boundary; evaluate survivors 

Shared gates and selector; two effort schedules  

> TACO TACO

-max 

Fig. 1. A concrete quotient and the layered system. (a) In xag_script , WØ is a cut-rewriting call whose returned network is discarded, so it is an identity at recipe scope; across the recipe universe, the quotient leaves a 31-action one-recipe Pareto cover. (b) Universal and state-conditional layers delimit the dynamic residue. TACO and TACO -max share one deterministic gate layer and selector; maximum effort uses an iterative AIG pre-pass and larger MIG-round and time limits. TACO -skip packages two exact gates as a plug-in for other optimizers; on orchestrate , it is 66/66 identical and 11% faster. 

[8]. MIG, XAG, and XMG added carrier-specific algebra and cost models [9], [10], [11]. Each addition answered a real structural or functional need, but no representation, operator, or ordering is uniformly best. The richer toolbox therefore leaves a residual problem: choosing among its tools. Once several passes are available, their ordering creates a second problem. DRiLLS, FlowTune, BOiLS, AlphaSyn, and related systems therefore cast synthesis as sequence or parameter search [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. Retrieval, learned circuit representations, and surrogate models improve decision quality or sample efficiency [17], [18], [19], [20]. These methods address genuine order sensitivity, with the available action vocabulary naturally serving as their starting point. arXiv:2607.23672v1 [cs.LO] 26 Jul 2026 Multiple DAG carriers add another axis of choice. LSOracle exposes carrier-specific optimization, while HeLO responds to heterogeneous modules and the cost of evaluating every carrier optimizer by partitioning the circuit, predicting one best-fit DAG type per subcircuit, and invoking its fixed LSOracle optimization script [21], [22]. The script is a useful coarse-grained abstraction: it packages low-level operator orderings while learning focuses on representation and partition choice. DAG-aware orchestration moves the decision to a finer granularity: a stand-alone pass can overlook roots better served by another engine [23]. It moves selection inside the graph, but its local-greedy policy evaluates rewrite, resubstitution, and refactoring at each root before choosing the largest local gain; its cheaper alternative follows a fixed priority order. The original paper accordingly identifies learned, domain-aware selection as a future direction. Together, these works move the decision boundary from flow sequences to carrier scripts on subcircuits and finally to individual roots. This progression leaves a complementary question: before selection, can source-level relations identify choices that are equivalent or evaluations that are unnecessary? Mature open tools contain identities, aliases, and nested variants accumu-lated over long development histories [24], [25]. Figure 1(a) shows the smallest visible example: a pure cut-rewriting call whose returned network is discarded cannot change the recipe state. These relations characterize the action menu as a whole. A natural first route is classical: abstract each transformation as an oracle, seek a circuit class closed under the action set, and prove one reusable theorem for that class. A represen-tative construction in Appendix N illustrates why practical conclusions are difficult to derive at this level: without source semantics , including guard constants, view limits, accounting rules, and update order, mathematical closure alone does not identify which deployed choices are equivalent or unnecessary. Artifact-specific verification has a mature compiler precedent: Alive and Alive2 validate concrete LLVM rewrites against implementation and language semantics [26], [27]. We apply the same discipline to relations among implemented synthesis operators. We therefore analyze concrete, pinned operators and prove operator-specific lemmas at implementation scale. Language-model systems have demonstrated capabilities in mathematical discovery and theorem solving [28], [29], including revisiting classical algorithmic questions [30]. Agentic source analysis makes this mathematical-engineering workload tractable by assigning lemma-scale source readings to LLM agents and subjecting retained relations to adversarial audit. 

Figure 1(b) summarizes this two-layer decomposition. Uni-versal relations remove state-independent redundancy, state-conditional gates avoid idle evaluations, and a scoped fiber obstruction marks part of the dynamic residue. Their reusable proof objects are fixed-scope quotients, sound admission predicates, and witnessed mixed-fiber obstructions. Section II formalizes this two-layer compression hypothesis for pinned ABC and mockturtle. The registry separates an exact, trajectory-preserving core from Tier-2 boundary gates with registered residuals. TACO 

inserts this fixed gate set directly into ABC’s pinned 

Abc_NtkOrchLocal , while preserving its AIG represen-tation, root traversal, stock engines, source parameters, and published mode schedules. A deterministic selector resolves the surviving residue. TACO -max retains the gate set and selector but uses the higher-effort AIG/MIG schedule for the HeLO comparison; TACO -skip exposes the exact gate-only subset as a plug-in. Our contributions are summarized as follows.  

> •

We propose agentic source analysis as a paradigm for deriving theory from implemented optimizers, coupling lemma-scale readings of pinned source with adversarial audit and a replayable claim registry.  

> •

We formulate the two-layer compression hypothesis through three proof objects: a 40-to-31 fixed-scope quo-tient, sound admission predicates for per-root gates, and witnessed mixed-fiber obstructions for the remaining dy-namic residue.  

> •

We develop TACO , a deterministic gate-conditioned opti-mizer inside ABC Orchestrate that preserves its published AIG execution skeleton and evaluates only choices left unresolved by the gates.  

> •

We evaluate the exact gates and integrated system sep-arately: the gates cut runtime by 11% with bit-identical outputs on 66 circuits, TACO uses fewer nodes on 14 of 16 Orchestrate circuits at 2.6× speed, and TACO -max reaches 0.903 NDP against HeLO’s exact-input rows. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II fixes the setting and proves the universal layer, Section III the predicate layer, and Section IV the cross-carrier arithmetic and the impossibility results. Section V builds the optimizer, Section VI describes the production method, and Section VII reports the experiments. Section VIII discusses limits and open questions. Section IX concludes. II. F IXED -S COPE QUOTIENTS AND UNIVERSAL 

COMPRESSION 

The compressions in this section are unconditional. When two actions can be shown to reach the same endpoint on every state, one of them can be deleted from every flow, and the action set shrinks before any search begins. The menu was assembled by accretion: recipes inherited stages, libraries grew parameter variants, and the duplicates were never accounted for. We find three kinds of state-independent redundancy:  

> •

identities : actions that cannot change the network;  

> •

aliases : two actions that are the same operator;  

> •

nested variants : a variant whose possible endpoints are already reached by a small basis. Each relation is established from the pinned implementation semantics at its stated scope; its source anchors and proof obligation are recorded in the released registry. 

A. The flat action space 

A state is a finite logic network on one of the carri-ers of the multilevel tradition [2], [3]: AIG (and-inverter 2graph [31]), MIG (majority-inverter graph [9]), XAG (XOR-AND graph [10]), or XMG (XOR-majority graph [11]). Throughout, pinned refers to a fixed source tree for each library: ABC at commit bcfdf59 , mockturtle at fb8f879 ,and LSOracle at febd152 for the recipe framework; the artifact builds exactly these trees. The action set under study has four parts. (1) The recipe universe : the 40 script actions of HeLO’s framework [22], inherited from LSOracle [21] and numbered H00–H39 (Table XIII). (2) The AIG en-gines of ABC: rewrite, resubstitution, refactoring, and the 

orchestrate command [23] built on them, which is the algorithm our gates accelerate. (3) The MIG algorithms :the mockturtle passes used by our MIG-side flow. (4) Our optimizer TACO , built from the compressed set and compared experimentally with ABC Orchestrate and HeLO’s published results. We separate implementation semantics from corpus mea-surement. Let Simpl be the legal states accepted by the pinned implementations. For a named benchmark set D and action set A, let R(D, A ) ⊆ Simpl be the states encountered from 

D under the stated flow. Source-level theorems quantify over 

Simpl (or an explicitly stated subset); measurements quantify only over the named D or R(D, A ).We also distinguish three semantic scopes. A root evaluator 

Ee(s, v ) commits at most one candidate of engine e at root v

(or returns s); a pass Pe(s) applies the pinned visit and commit schedule over a network; and a recipe action Th(s) composes complete stages. A candidate is a replacement subgraph with integer gain g, the size of the root’s fanout-free cone minus the reported insertion count, and resulting root level ℓ. Relations below compare transformations at the same scope: the 40-to-31 quotient is recipe-level, the selector lemmas are root-level, and each predicate names the exact evaluation it gates. Whole-pass claims require a separate relation. We write I for the identity at any scope. Bridge actions change the carrier and are first-class actions with their own costs; a lane (bridge in, operators, bridge out) is treated as a macro and lies outside the formal relations. Table II collects the notation used throughout, and Table I the compressed action set this section produces. 

Definition 1 (containment, alias, redundancy) . At one fixed semantic scope, for a transformation F and a set of transfor-mations G with the same input domain, write F ⪯ G when 

F (x) ∈ { I(x)} ∪ { G(x) : G ∈ G} for every legal input x, and call F redundant against G. Write F ≡ G when their endpoints agree pointwise, and call them aliases. Every use below states whether x is a state s or a state–root pair (s, v ). The relations are for the implementations as compiled; audit anchors are collected in the released claim manifest and Appendix A. 

Definition 2 (exact Pareto cover) . For a recipe set A and input C, let PF A(C) be the Pareto frontier of the one-recipe endpoints {q(Th(C)) : h ∈ A} under the reported node– depth metric q. A subset B ⊆ A is an exact Pareto cover 

on an input set D when PF B (C) = PF A(C) for every 

C ∈ D. “Exact” denotes equality of these one-action frontiers. Minimum cardinality and arbitrary multi-step trajectories lie 

TABLE I THE COMPRESSED ACTION SET : THE RETAINED MENU (TOP ), AND REMOVALS MARKED † ( REMOVED PERMANENTLY BY THEOREM ), ‡ ( SKIPPED PER STATE BY A PROVED PREDICATE ), AND § ( ASOURCE -DERIVED OR MEASURED TIER -2 CONTRACT ).                

> retained menu
> AIG Rewrite (4-cut); resubstitution ( ≤2 inserted nodes); Refactoring (source-default 10/16-node cone limits); balancing MIG Algebraic depth rewriting (3 strategies); cut rewriting (4-cut); resubstitution; SOP balancing; Akers refactoring Lanes Whole-network excursions into MIG, AIG, XAG, XMG
> removed or gated
> Strict-gain-only variants † Zero-gain variant covers them 0/1-Insert resubstitution † Nested inside the 2-insert version 4-Leaf refactoring cones † Same operator under an applicability guard No-area algebraic † Contained in the area-allowed variant 3-Leaf cut rewriting † Dominated by 4-leaf Critical-path balancing † Contained in all-node balancing Saturation flag (FR) † Dead guard; never fires XAG Constant-fanin opt. ‡ Identity on XOR-free states (G-XAGCF) XMG boundary skip § Registered Tier-2 gate; collision mechanism in Thm. 16 SOP passes on XOR-rich cones § ISOP covers explode (aes core >20 min per pass)

TABLE II NOTATION AND NAMED CONCEPTS USED THROUGHOUT .                                           

> Term / symbol Meaning State sA finite network in Simpl
> Ee(s, v );Pe(s);
> Th(s)
> Root evaluation; pass; recipe endpoint
> I(s)The identity endpoint (no change) Strash Structural hashing, the canonical AIG construction Candidate A proposed replacement, with gain gand level ℓ
> Gain gCone size minus inserted nodes, at a root
> F⪯ G Same-scope endpoint is Ior one endpoint in G
> a≡bEqual endpoints on every state (alias) Cut ( k-leaf) A small cone under a node, at most kleaves MFFC Maximal fanout-free cone rooted at a node NPN Class Functions equal up to negation and permutation NDP Node-depth product, the HeLO objective R2, R2p Resubstitution, 2 inserted nodes; depth-preserving variant Record An allocated object in the node manager, live or dead Dry An engine or pass with no win over a measurement block Required level Arrival-time bound; critical = zero slack Offer / win Returns a positive-gain candidate / the selector commits it Identity region States where the operator provably changes nothing Pareto frontier Mutually undominated (nodes, depth) outcomes Recipe universe The 40 inherited script actions (H00–H39) Pinned The fixed source trees of §II-A Bridge action / lane A carrier-changing action / bridge plus operators Stored size s∗Gate count of an NPN class’s stored database form Trajectory The sequence of states a flow visits MAJ-compressible MIG form strictly smaller than AIG form

outside this definition. 

The two-layer compression hypothesis. Let A be the op-erator set of a production logic-synthesis tool, acting on its legal implementation states. We hypothesize that its operator relations admit the following decomposition: (i) there is a basis B ⊆ A whose alias and metric-dominance relations are certifiable at an explicitly named semantic scope, preserving the corresponding one-action 3Pareto frontier; (ii) the idle behavior of an operator e ∈ B is partly certi-fiable by sound structural gates: sterile or dedupe gates (Definition 11) that skip provably pointless evaluations without claiming to find them all; (iii) when an operator’s identity status varies within one polarity-erased structural class, no predicate over that structure can be both sound (fires only on identities) and complete (fires on every identity); this delimits a dynamic residue. 

Definition 3 (function-dependent operator) . An operator is 

function-dependent when its acceptance rule reads Boolean function data (truth tables, canonical forms, simulation) be-yond the polarity-erased structure. The three clauses form an analysis framework. For the pinned ABC and mockturtle trees, each relation and gate is proved at its stated scope. The recipe quotient preserves the one-action frontier over every legal input to the pinned recipe implemen-tation, while corpus enumeration independently rechecks the quotient and records which representatives are live. A concrete polarity pair instantiates the structural obstruction for cut-4 rewriting. Clause (i) is the subject of this section, clause (ii) of Section III, and clause (iii) of Section IV. 

B. The discarded-cut lemma and quotient chain 

Some recipe stages cannot change anything because the operator they call is a pure function and the recipe discards its result. 

Lemma 4 (discarded cut) . Let ρ be any recipe stage that invokes cut rewriting on a state s without binding the returned network. Then Tρ(s) = s for every state s.

An entire family of parameterized recipes then collapses. 

Corollary 5 (quotient and exact Pareto cover) . Eleven of the 40 recipe actions collapse into three alias classes (four AIG-script variants that become identical once their discarded stages are removed, five MIG-script variants of the same kind, and two XAG-script variants), removing eight actions. One further action is metric-dominated (the no-op recipe action H00). The remaining 31 representatives form an exact Pareto cover in the sense of Definition 2 on the complete legal input domain of the pinned recipe implementation. Pointwise aliases and the universal H27 –H00 dominance preserve the one-recipe frontier for every legal input. Corpus enumeration pro-vides an independent regression and liveness check. Minimum cardinality remains open. Proof skeleton. Substituting Lemma 4 for every unbound cut-rewrite stage makes four AIG recipes equivalent, five MIG recipes equivalent, and two XAG recipes equivalent. Their remaining parameter differences either feed an identity stage or the functional-reduction saturation flag. That flag reads an append-only record count; the pass allocates no new record, so the flagged and default transitions coincide at every iteration. These three alias classes remove eight actions. For the remaining dominance, H00 is the identity recipe. H27 imports the same graph into the MIG carrier, applies one no-area algebraic depth pass, and lowers it back. Each admitted move replaces two majority nodes by at most two and strictly reduces level; cleanup cannot worsen either coordinate. Hence qH27 (C) ≤ qH00 (C) for every legal input C. Removing this dominated action leaves 31 representatives, and pointwise equality or coordinatewise dominance preserves the one-recipe Pareto frontier. Certificate U-Q31 records this result at vocabulary scope: every deployed action has an explicit representative or domi-nator at the same semantic scope, and the retained vocabulary preserves the full one-recipe frontier. Discarded returns, inert guards, and storage rules supply local premises for that scoped composition. 

Proposition 6 (two non-collapsible look-alike pairs) . Two tempting additional merges are invalid: the MIG and XMG algebraic scripts are not the same action, and the no-area MIG variant is not dominated by its XMG twin. A seven-AND single-output AIG witnesses the first separation and a nine-gate witness the second, both through the old-node hash asymmetry of §III-B. Appendix X records the complete refutation trail. C. Selector lemmas 

The next five relations concern nested variants. They cover every nested variant pair in the pinned action set: each end-point reachable by the smaller variant is also reachable by the larger. Formally, each relation is a ⪯ statement between engine variants and follows from their shared acceptance guard. 

Lemma 7 (per-root selector compressions) . Let a and a′ be two variants of one engine differing in a single parameter. Then the following hold for every legal state–root pair (s, v ),with each endpoint interpreted as Ea(s, v ):

(a) strict-gain-only a: Ea(s, v ) ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s };

(b) no-area algebraic a: Ea(s, v ) ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s };

(c) critical-only balancing a: Ea(s, v ) ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s };

(d) resubstitution with insertion budget k ∈ {0, 1}:

ERk (s, v ) ∈ { ERk+1 (s, v ), s }; the larger budget reaches every first success of the smaller; 

(e) a 4-leaf refactoring limit: ED4 (s, v ) ∈ { ED6 (s, v ), s },because the default 6-leaf variant evaluates every ad-mitted cone identically. 

These relations shrink the candidate basis of a single root evaluation . Whole-pass endpoints have a separate scope be-cause later visits can observe an earlier commit. Likewise, the 3-leaf/4-leaf row of Table I states recipe-level metric dominance under its reported objective. 

D. Gain-form theorems 

The last two lemmas provide gain contracts for the selector. A per-root selection rule compares reported gains, so each engine needs a proved relation between that report and the realized node-count change. The next two lemmas pin the 4TABLE III THE UNIVERSAL LAYER : SOURCE -CERTIFIED RELATIONS AT THEIR STATED SEMANTIC SCOPES .                  

> Statement Mechanism Unbound cut-rewrite stages =IPure function Saturation variants ≡default Record counting 3 alias classes +one dominance Lem. 4 31-action exact Pareto cover Recipe quotient; metric dominance Lem. 7 (a)–(e) Guard reading RS gain ≥1; RW/RF gain ∈[0 ,|MFFC |]Stop-gates; accounting

reported gain ranges; for resubstitution the report is also a lower bound on realized reduction. The resubstitution lemma also rules out the selector’s zero-gain branch. 

Lemma 8 (RS gain) . Let c be a resubstitution candidate at any root v of any state s. Then g(c) ≥ 1.Proof sketch. Candidates are tried in increasing insertion bud-get with stop-gates on the cone size: a zero-insertion success yields g = |MFFC( v)| ≥ 1, and a k-insertion candidate is reached only when the cone has at least k+1 records, giving 

g ≥ 1 again. 

Lemma 9 (RW/RF gain) . Let c be a rewrite or refactoring candidate at any root v. Then 0 ≤ g(c) ≤ | MFFC( v)|.

Table III collects the layer. III. S OUND ADMISSION PREDICATES 

The predicate layer partitions the state space and gates each region separately: a cheap structural check on the current state decides whether an operator’s evaluation there is provably pointless, and only those evaluations are skipped. Universal relations remove an operator over the entire implementation domain; predicate gates make the finer decision separately for each state or root. The operators that survive still have idle regions: rewriting has nothing to rewrite at a shallow root (Theorem 14), and algebraic depth rewriting has nothing to reassociate on a balanced network (Theorem 13). Gates come in three kinds, sterile, dedupe, and accounting (Definition 11). A gate below is always such a predicate, never a network node. Every trajectory-certified skip leaves the trajectory (the sequence of states the flow visits) bit-identical. The first three results below license such skips, and the fourth provides exact accounting without skipping. The final case proves the only mechanism by which two carrier implementations can diverge; the cheaper boundary-only test derived from it remains a source-derived Tier-2 choice with a separately measured residual. 

Definition 10 (structural predicate) . Let σ(s) be the directed typed multigraph of s after erasing every edge-complement bit and every primary-input variable name, while retaining adjacency, multiplicity, node type (constant, primary input, or gate operator), outputs, and the distinguished root when one is specified. A structural predicate is any predicate that factors through σ: π(s) = bπ(σ(s)) , or π(s, v ) = bπ(σ(s, v )) at root scope. It may therefore use the entire polarity-erased graph, including information beyond aggregate counts, but it cannot use truth tables, simulation values, input identities, or edge polarity. 

Definition 11 (sterile, dedupe, and accounting gates) . Astructural predicate π is a sterile gate for a root evaluator 

Ee if π(s, v ) = 1 implies Ee(s, v ) = s, and for a pass Pe

if π(s) = 1 implies Pe(s) = s. It is a dedupe gate for two transformations at the same scope if π = 1 implies equal endpoints at that scope. An accounting gate only bounds the gain an evaluator can return; it skips nothing. Every gate below names its scope. Only a proved sterile or dedupe implication licenses a trajectory-equality claim; empirical gates are labeled separately. 

A. The gate shortlist 

Resubstitution admits divisors only when they satisfy mar-gins derived from the required level, so a depth-preserving variant that clamps the required level to the old root level can differ from the free variant only where the root has slack. On a critical root there is no slack, and the two variants produce the same endpoint. 

Theorem 12 (dedupe on critical roots) . Let R be free resubsti-tution and R∗ its depth-preserving variant with required level clamped to ℓ(v). Applied at a critical root v, the two root evaluators coincide: ER∗ (s, v ) = ER(s, v ).

Algebraic depth rewriting accepts a reassociation at a node only when the node’s two deepest children differ in level by more than one. With no such node anywhere, all three strategies (selective, depth-first, and aggressive) have nothing to accept. 

Theorem 13 (level-gap guard, sterile) . If no node n of s

satisfies ℓ(deep( n)) > ℓ (second( n)) + 1 , where deep( n) and 

second( n) are n’s deepest and second-deepest children, then each of the three algebraic strategies acts as I on s.

Rewrite’s evaluation loop considers only cuts with exactly four leaves; smaller cuts are enumerated and skipped. Shallow roots with a primary-input fanin cannot supply four leaves. 

Theorem 14 (no-4-cut, sterile) . If ℓ(v) = 2 and one fanin of 

v is a primary input, then every cut of v has at most three leaves, and the rewrite engine proposes no candidate at v.Proof. A primary input contributes only its trivial cut; a level-1 fanin contributes at most its two level-0 fanins; a cut of v

is a union of the two, of size at most 1 + 2 = 3 .The gate-only diagnostic pairs G-RW with a second exact stock-path filter, G-RF. At a genuine two-input AND of dis-tinct nonconstant primary inputs, refactoring reconstructs the root itself, and the identity-hash guard rejects that candidate. G-RF is therefore a sterile gate for stock orchestrate ;integrated TACO uses its broader registered RF predicates instead. The cut-4 accounting result characterizes when rewriting can yield positive gain. Only 27 of the 222 classes have stored 5size at most 3, which explains why firing at low MFFC sizes is confined to a small subset of classes; structural-hash reuse can enlarge that region. The accounting is exact relative to the implementation because every replacement comes from its class’s stored MIG form. Positive gain requires the removed cone to exceed the unreferenced replacement cost, which is bounded by the stored size. 

Theorem 15 (cut4 accounting) . Let c be a 4-leaf cut at node 

n whose NPN class has stored size s∗ (the gate count of the class’s stored MIG database form). The pass fires at n

through c only if the replacement’s unreferenced gate count is below |MFFC( n)|; the count is at most s∗. Hence (i) the pass offers nothing on one-record cones, and (ii) any node with |MFFC( n)| ≥ 8 and a genuine cut (at least 3 leaves) admits an offer, since the 4-variable table has max s∗ = 7 .B. Case study: the XMG gate 

The gates so far concern single engines. The final one concerns two carriers at once; we write and( x, y ) for the two-input AND, encoded maj(0 , x, y ) in a majority carrier. The MIG and XMG algebraic engines apply the same majority rules; they differ in exactly one detail of substitution: the MIG engine rejects a substitution whose rebuilt parent co-incides with the node being replaced, and the XMG engine does not. The engines can therefore diverge only through a self-referential substitution, which requires the shape p =and( n, x ) with n = and( x, y ): replacing n by y rebuilds a parent with exactly n’s signature (Fig. 2). 

Theorem 16 (XMG–MIG collision necessity) . Run the XMG and MIG majority components from the same state, with the same visit order. If the two executions first diverge, then immediately before that step the common state contains an adjacent node–parent pair that shares a fanin. Consequently, if no such pair occurs at any intermediate state of their common execution trace, the two pass endpoints coincide. 

The theorem identifies a necessary immediate source-level condition for divergence. A complete lane schedule lies be-yond its scope because reassociation can manufacture the shape internally. The deployed G-P6 shortcut rechecks for the pair after the XMG DFS stage and treats absence as a Tier-2 boundary gate in TACO . Its per-gate ablation changes s38417 from NDP 136,918 to 137,173 and leaves the other five H6 cases unchanged. The G-P6 registry entry therefore carries a measured Tier-2 contract. An unconditional MIG– XMG equivalence is false. Appendix V records the correction trail. IV. C ROSS -C ARRIER WITNESSES AND THE DYNAMIC 

BOUNDARY 

This section gives tight bridge costs, a witness separating carrier-specific optima, and a scoped obstruction that delimits part of the dynamic residue.                                               

> n
> p
> xy
> (a) p= and( n, x ),
> n= and( x, y )
> n′
> p′
> xy
> same signature
> (b) replace nby y:rebuilt p′collides with n
> Fig. 2. The divergence trigger. (a) The self-referential shape: pand its child
> nshare the fanin x. (b) After replacing nby y, the rebuilt parent carries n’s exact signature; one engine rejects this substitution and the other does not. TABLE IV THE PREDICATE SET (SHORTLIST ;FULL SET IN APPENDIX K).
> Gate Predicate Contract and evidence G-P4 (R2p dedupe) Root critical Certified dedupe, Thm. 12 G-P5 (algebraic) No gap node Certified sterile, Thm. 13 G-RW (rewrite) Level-2 PI-fanin root Certified sterile, Thm. 14 G-RF (refactoring) Genuine two-PI AND root Certified sterile; TACO -skip only G-E1E5 (cut-4 accounting)
> MFFC > s ∗(class) Certified accounting, Thm. 15 G-P6 (XMG bound-ary) No trigger pair after XMG DFS Source-derived Tier-2; mechanism in Thm. 16

A. Exchange rates 

Bridge actions convert between carriers, and their per-node worst-case costs are tight. Lowering to MIG dispatches per source node type:                     

> source node lowered form gates/levels AND (AIG/XAG) maj(0 , a, b ), i.e. an AND ≤1/≤1
> XOR (XAG) 3 majority gates ≤3/≤2
> XOR3 (XMG, 3-input XOR) 3 majority gates ≤3/≤2

When no structural-hash reuse is available, these bounds equal the MIG-native minima: the MIG NPN table’s own forms for these classes have the same cost, and for XOR2 the bound 

s∗ = 3 is proved by case analysis: no two-majority form exists. Hash reuse can only lower the realized cost. An excursion that creates k XOR nodes therefore costs at most 3k gates at the bridge, and the lane comparison evaluates that bound against the excursion’s measured yield. 

B. Complementarity 

Cross-carrier operator pairs do not dominate each other, even when they share a name and a cut size. AIG rewriting minimizes AIG size against an AIG table; MIG cut rewriting minimizes MIG size against a MIG table. Call a function 

MAJ-compressible when its MIG form is strictly smaller than its AIG form; MAJ3 is the smallest example, requiring one majority gate versus four AIG ANDs (Fig. 3). On such a class, a cone can remain above its MIG optimum even after AIG rewriting has saturated. 

Proposition 17 (complementarity) . MIG cut rewriting after AIG rewriting is not dominated: it offers a positive-gain candidate on the MAJ-compressible cones of a state that meet 

6∧ ∧         

> ∧∧
> abc
> AIG: s∗= 4
> maj
> abc
> MIG: s∗= 1
> Fig. 3. The smallest MAJ-compressible gap: MAJ3 requires four AIG ANDs versus one MIG majority gate.

the accounting condition of Theorem 15. Hence a predicate of the form “AIG-side optimization makes MIG-side NPN rewriting redundant” fails in particular on the intersection of the MAJ-compressible class and the fire region of Theorem 15. 

The MAJ-compressible gap therefore prevents an AIG pre-pass from substituting for MIG-side rewriting inside a MIG flow. 

C. Impossibility (scoped statements) 

The impossibility result is a fiber obstruction. A mixed fiber rules out a complete polarity-blind structural certificate; source-level function dependence alone leaves the question open. 

Theorem 18 (polarity-erased fiber obstruction) . Fix an opera-tor e at root or pass scope and let ze(x) = 1 exactly when its endpoint on legal input x is the identity. If two inputs x0, x 1

satisfy σ(x0) = σ(x1) but ze(x0)̸ = ze(x1), then no structural predicate is both sound and complete for e’s identity region on any domain containing both inputs. Proof. Every structural predicate is constant on a fiber of σ,whereas ze takes both values on the exhibited fiber. For cut-4 rewriting, let m1 = maj( a, b, c ), m2 =maj( m1, a, b ), and n = maj( m1, m 2, d ). With plain edges, absorption gives m2 = m1; the root lies in the one-gate majority class and cut-4 rewriting offers positive gain. Com-plementing only the m1 → m2 edge preserves σ, levels, fanouts, and cone sizes, yet produces a genuine four-variable class whose stored form does not beat the two-record cone, so the evaluator offers nothing. The two inputs therefore form the required mixed fiber for this deployed operator. A polarity-erased admission gate assigns the same decision to both members of that fiber. Soundness therefore requires both to undergo dynamic evaluation. The witness thus fixes the boundary of this predicate language for cut-4 rewriting, while narrower structural subclasses and function-aware gates remain available. For the other surviving engines, source inspection identifies the function data read by their acceptance rules; an analogous obstruction remains open until a mixed fiber is exhibited. Appendices I and K give the decoded cut-4 evidence and the full gate ledger, respectively. Coordinate envelopes require a separate scope qualification. The full construction appears in Appendices M and N. The pinned actions include constructors that may trade nodes, depth, fanout, or path multiplicity; the registry supplies no invariant closing a box formed from corpus maxima. Source-level statements therefore quantify over Simpl or an explicitly named subset, and measurements quantify over named cor-pora. Any coordinate box remains descriptive until an action-specific invariant closes it. V. T HE OPTIMIZER TACO 

The two layers compile into a deterministic gate layer :before an implemented operator is evaluated, its gate either proves that the evaluation is unnecessary, applies a registered Tier-2 boundary decision, or leaves the operator in the dynamic residue. TACO is the executable realization of that layer. We evaluate three named configurations: TACO in the Orchestrate comparison, the higher-effort TACO -max in the HeLO com-parison, and TACO -skip as a gate-only diagnostic on stock 

orchestrate . All three use fixed deterministic schedules and selectors. The Orchestrate-comparison form directly modifies the pinned ABC function Abc_NtkOrchLocal . It preserves the strashed-AIG representation, topological per-root traver-sal, stock RW/RS/RF engines and their source parameters, level discipline, and the published single/iterative/ resyn /

resyn3 mode structure. The gate layer is inserted at the operator-admission points. The retained basis also exposes R2p, a depth-constrained instance of the same RS engine, and ranks the remaining candidates by a fixed gain, level, and tie-breaking rule. Consequently, the orchestration experiment compares two selectors inside the same published backbone. The HeLO-comparison protocol reuses this gated AIG back-bone, then adds a deterministic native-MIG loop and carrier excursions so that the available operator families and NDP objective match the HeLO protocol as closely as the published interfaces allow. Its maximum-effort setting keeps the gate set and action menu fixed, replaces the normal resyn AIG pre-pass with an iterative fixpoint of at most 20 passes, and raises the MIG-round and time caps. The fixed gate set shared by the two protocol forms is split into 

Gexact = {G-P4 , G-RW , G-P5 , G-P12 , G-XAGCF },

GT2 = {G-P1 , G-P2 , G-P3 , G-P6 },

GTACO = Gexact ˙∪ G T2 .

(1) Here G-P4 is the critical-root R2p dedupe; G-RW the no-4-cut RW skip; G-P5 the MIG algebraic precondition; G-P12 the XMG-DFS identity gate; and G-XAGCF the XOR-free XAG skip. G-P1/G-P2/G-P3/G-P6 are respectively the MFFC-1 cover, RF-territory boundary, source fanout guard, and XMG boundary gate. The first subset consists of same-scope identities or deduplications; the second consists of source-derived boundary decisions with registered residuals. 

Gexact denotes the five exact gates used by the integrated TACO 

protocols. The separate exact G-RF identity filter is reserved for TACO -skip’s stock path; integrated TACO uses G-P1 and G-P2 for RF admission.  

> TACO

uses this fixed gate set, source-default engine pa-rameters, and the stated deterministic stopping rules. For the HeLO comparison, TACO -max retains the same gate set 7TABLE V TWO EVALUATION PROTOCOLS SHARING THE SOURCE -DERIVED GATE REGISTRY AND THE ORCHESTRATE -DERIVED AIG BACKBONE .               

> Dimension Orchestrate comparison HeLO comparison Backbone Direct modification of
> Abc_NtkOrchLocal
> Same gated AIG front end, then deterministic extension Representation Strashed AIG throughout AIG pre-pass, carrier excursions (MIG/AIG/XAG/XMG), native MIG output Objective Node gain under the published level discipline NDP =Nodes ×depth Selection Per-root: 4 candidates, gain/level-ranked commit Per-pass: best strict-NDP-improving pass committed Moves ABC engines (rewrite, resub, R2p, refactor) Native mockturtle passes (algebraic strategies, cut-4 rewriting, resub, balance, refactor) Scheduling Published mode structure (single, iterative, resyn, resyn3) Fixed lane order; round loop; shared time budget Higher effort Published iterative schedule Iterative AIG pre-pass; more MIG rounds and time; same deterministic menu

and selector while using the iterative AIG pre-pass and larger MIG-round and time limits described above. TACO -skip isolates two exact gates in the stock LocalGreedy path, leaving its selector unchanged and enabling a whole-flow bit-identity check. Integrated TACO runs the full deterministic gate-conditioned selector; Section VII reports its integrated QoR. In the HeLO-comparison protocol, the normal AIG-side orchestrated pass ( resyn mode) first reduces node count under the level discipline; carrier excursions then evaluate the other representations, and the NDP-evaluated loop continues in native MIG. At maximum effort, the iterative AIG pre-pass runs for at most 20 iterations, followed by at most 60 MIG rounds under a doubled time budget. The extra AIG iterations can trade depth for fewer nodes, and that trade need not improve NDP. Maximum effort aligns the evaluation budget more closely with HeLO while retaining the same deterministic menu and selector. Table V compares the protocol forms by dimension, and Algorithms 1 and 2 give the two selection rules. In the pseudocode, E NABLED (P, m ) removes only the pass named by a registered gate whose predicate holds; a gate for one pass never suppresses unrelated passes. VI. A GENTIC SOURCE ANALYSIS 

The method is a weakest-first loop over implemented oper-ators (Fig. 4). Each round performs four steps: 1) measure offers and commits inside the deployed pipeline, because a standalone harness can misstate an operator’s role; 2) select the least-productive surviving operator; 3) derive from the pinned implementation an alias, con-tainment relation, or state-conditional certificate for the operator’s idle region; and 4) submit the draft relation and its source anchors to an independent adversarial audit. Every accepted relation shrinks the menu examined by later rounds. The loop stops when no further relation survives the 

Algorithm 1 Per-root deterministic selection (Orchestrate comparison) 

Require: Strashed AIG s, engines E = {RW , RS , R2p , RF } 

> 1:

for all Roots v of s in topological order do  

> 2:

Ev ← { e ∈ E : no enabled gate for e fires at (s, v )} 

> 3:

for all e ∈ Ev do  

> 4:

Evaluate e at v; record ce = ⊥ if it offers nothing, otherwise (ge, ℓ e) 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

F ← { e ∈ Ev : ce̸ = ⊥ ∧ [ge > 0 ∨ (ge = 0 ∧ ℓe <ℓ(v))] } 

> 7:

if F̸ = ∅ then  

> 8:

Commit arg max e∈F ge; ties by lower ℓe, then by 

RW ≻ RS ≻ R2p ≻ RF  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

end for Algorithm 2 Carrier lanes and NDP round loop (HeLO comparison) 

Require: AIG s; shared budget B 

> 1:

P ← { alg sel , alg dfs , alg aggr , cut4 } 

> 2:

P ← P ∪ { resub , bal , refac } 

> 3:

a0 ← common AIG after the selected AIG pre-pass  

> 4:

for all L ∈ [MIG , AIG , XAG , XMG] do  

> 5:

if B is spent then  

> 6:

break  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

m ← LOWER TOMIG (EXCURSION (L, a 0))  

> 9:

Enable every p ∈ P 

> 10:

repeat  

> 11:

Pm ← ENABLED (P, m ) 

> 12:

for all p ∈ Pm do  

> 13:

Evaluate p on m; record NDP( p(m))  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

I ← { p ∈ Pm : NDP( p(m)) < NDP( m)} 

> 16:

if I = ∅ then  

> 17:

break  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

p∗ ← arg min p∈I NDP( p(m))  

> 20:

m ← p∗(m) (ties by fixed pass-enum order)  

> 21:

until B is spent  

> 22:

Retain m iff its NDP strictly beats the incumbent  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

return incumbent (lane ties retain the earlier fixed lane) audit. LLM agents generate bounded source-reading drafts. A draft enters the registry only after its proof obligation, source anchors, and checker, where applicable, support it under independent audit and author adjudication. This organization makes a large number of bounded readings affordable. The audit protocol makes each claim traceable. Table VI lists the record required to replay one analysis task. A registry entry contains the statement, semantic scope, pinned source anchor, proof obligation, status, and an executable checker 8Measure usage Select weakest Draft lemma Audit 

> Registry: CURRENT Withdrawn
> survives
> broken
> Compressed menu
> no relation found
> menu shrinks; next round

Fig. 4. The agentic source analysis loop. Usage is measured in the deployed pipeline, the weakest operator is examined next, and every draft lemma must survive an adversarial audit over the cited source lines before it enters the citable registry. TABLE VI THE REPRODUCIBLE RECORD FOR ONE AGENTIC SOURCE -ANALYSIS TASK . R EPLAY FOLLOWS THE STATED OBLIGATION AND ITS ATTACHED EVIDENCE .      

> Record Required content Task packet Fixed claim or operator, pinned source tree, semantic scope, and instruction to seek a counterexample Draft Statement, source anchors, proof obligation, and any finite checker Independent audit Separate read-only assignment instructed to refute; findings preserved even when the claim is repaired Acceptance Author adjudication; only a supported final statement may enter the registry as CURRENT Release Task prompt, run log, registry, per-claim audit records, checker manifest, and final digests

where the obligation is finite. Acceptance depends on that obligation and its attached evidence. Claims that survive independent re-reading enter the registry as CURRENT; WITHDRAWN and REFUTED entries remain visible as provenance. Finite obligations receive exhaustive checkers. Appendices U, W, and X report the failure controls, final-validation ledger, and representative refutations.The re-tained audits refuted or narrowed draft claims, corrected a tie rule, and rejected a defective XMG predicate implementation before registration. The preserved trail records each change. VII. E XPERIMENTS 

We use the four named sets in Table VII. i2c and mem ctrl belong to both U66 and H6. The four sets cover every re-ported experiment. An older 11-case gate-development record appears only where it is labeled historical. The source-level theorems quantify over their implementation domains. For performance, D55 is the development manifest. The eleven cases in O16 \ D55 form a disjoint evaluation subset; their corrected final artifacts were added after the method was frozen and are reported separately below. The H6 study is a fixed-case protocol comparison. The two comparisons follow the optimizer’s two protocol forms. Orchestrate supplies a same-source controlled compari-son because TACO is derived directly from its implementation. The HeLO study uses every reported case for which a usable input can be recovered and separates exact inputs from re-constructions and the near variant. The reported performance metrics are logic-level nodes, depth, and NDP in the pinned implementations. 

TABLE VII BENCHMARK SETS AND THEIR ROLES .

D55 Supplied development manifest: 10 EPFL arithmetic, 10 EPFL random/control, 11 ISCAS’85, 12 official IWLS-2026 seed AIGs, and 12 randomly generated AIGs ( random-01 –04 and h016 –h023 ). 

O16 The orchestration paper’s 16 cases: five EPFL, four VTR/FlowTune, two ISCAS’89, and five ITC’99; five overlap D55 .

U66 D55 ∪ O16 , the 66 unique inputs used for the gate-only and corpus-wide checks. 

H† 

> 6

aes_core , chip_bridge , fpu , i2c , mem_ctrl ,and s38417 ; the per-case HeLO comparison. 

> †

Input status: exact: aes_core , i2c , mem_ctrl ; LSOracle-OPDB re-construction (Yosys plus ABC latch cut): chip_bridge , fpu ; disclosed near variant: s38417 . Of HeLO’s other seven rows, five have no recon-structible reported input ( pico-rv , des_perf , ethernet , vga_lcd ,

DMA ) and two have no packaged input ( dyn_node , fpga_bridge ); none enters a geomean. TABLE VIII PREDICATE -LAYER SAVINGS , SAME ALGORITHM , 66 CIRCUITS .                

> Configuration Outputs Total seconds Saved
> orchestrate [23] 66/66 38.2 0%
> TACO -skip (both gates) 66/66 identical 34.0 11% No-4-cut skip alone 66/66 identical 34.1 11% RF 2-PI-cone skip alone 66/66 identical 34.1 11%

The optimizer has three named configurations:  

> •

TACO : the gate set GTACO of Eq. (1), source-default engine parameters, and the stated deterministic stopping rules;  

> •

TACO -max: the same gates and selector, an iterative AIG pre-pass of at most 20 passes, and larger MIG-round and time limits;  

> •

TACO -skip: the gate-only diagnostic, comprising the published orchestration algorithm with two trajectory-certified G-RW/G-RF gates added. The orchestration comparison uses TACO under the published mode schedules. The HeLO comparison uses TACO -max to match the broader operator-evaluation budget of that protocol. Every reported result records its effort (evaluations, passes, seconds on one machine). Every optimizer output passes one final untimed equivalence sweep. Reference outputs come from the pinned binaries under their published commands. 

A. Validation of the compression hypothesis 1) The predicate layer at work: The gated variant of the published orchestration algorithm ( TACO -skip) produces bit-identical outputs on all 66 circuits and, in the bit-identity harness (isolated reruns of the pinned binary), reduces total runtime from 38.2 s to 34.0 s ( −11% ). The two gates’ savings overlap almost completely: each alone recovers 4.1 s of the 4.2 s (Table VIII). Their shared near-PI firing region explains the overlap, while each gate suppresses a different engine evaluation. 9TABLE IX EXACT PREDICTIONS AND MEASURED TIER -2 BOUNDARY CHECKS .                  

> Theorem Prediction Measured R2p dedupe (Thm. 12)
> ≡Ron critical roots 0 distinct commits R2p, restricted offer Fires only on slack roots with a level-raising free can-didate voter 5, ctrl 4 commits level-gap (Thm. 13) Guard lossless skips only gap-free states XMG boundary (G-P6) Mechanism requires a trace collision 0/6 consistency violations cut4 (Thm. 15) Fires in MFFC ×s∗region region confirmed

2) Empirical checks of predicted regions: The exact predic-tions and the measured Tier-2 boundary checks are reported separately in Table IX. On critical roots, depth-preserving and free resubstitution coincide, and the depth-preserving variant contributes no distinct commit. On slack roots where the free candidate raises the root level, the restricted evaluator is live: five commits on voter and four on ctrl. The level-gap guard suppresses algebraic passes only on gap-free states. The cut4 pass fires only where the replacement’s unreferenced count falls below the cone size, exactly the region the accounting theorem predicts. For XMG, Theorem 16 predicts the collision mechanism, while the cheaper boundary-only G-P6 shortcut is evaluated empirically in the integrated flow: its logged trigger and outcome fields show zero consistency violations on H6.

3) The residue is dynamic: The surviving restructuring operators offer broadly and win sparsely. Across the HeLO set, balancing and Akers refactoring offer improvements but commit rarely (on the final campaign record, balancing offers 26 times and is never selected), while the algebraic strate-gies and resubstitution carry the realized gains. This sparsity motivates dynamic evaluation of the residue. The mixed-fiber witness of Theorem 18 supplies the separate obstruction for cut-4 rewriting. 

B. The orchestration comparison 

The baseline is the published Orchestrate algorithm [23], invoked by the ABC command orchestrate . TACO 

was developed directly from that implementation: 

Abc_NtkCgoPass retains the Abc_NtkOrchLocal 

per-root skeleton and stock operator implementations, then inserts the source-derived gate layer and the fixed residual rule. Across all rows, the strashed AIG, topological root traversal, RW/RS/RF engine code, published mode schedules, inputs, host, and harness are fixed. R2p is the same RS engine with a required-level override. Table X gives the intervention ladder. Table VIII iso-lates two exact admission gates with the published selector unchanged. The integrated TACO row measures the gate-conditioned selector, including R2p admission and its fixed gain/level/tie rule. Table XI reports the sixteen circuits from the original paper in single-pass mode. All seconds in this subsection come from the portfolio harness, which times every flow the same way; machine conditions differ between the two harnesses, so seconds are comparable only within a table.               

> TABLE X INTERVENTION LADDER AND ATTRIBUTION IN THE CONTROLLED
> ORCHESTRATION COMPARISON . R ATIOS ARE NODES /LEVELS /NDP.
> System Increment Measured outcome
> orchestrate Published Abc_NtkOrchLocal
> skeleton and selector Reference
> TACO -skip G-RW/G-RF at stock admission points 66/66 identical; −11%
> same-algorithm time
> TACO GTACO ,R2p admission, fixed residual rule; source defaults and stated termination
> 0.990 /0.968 /0.958 ;
> 2.6×

The single-pass mode is the primary system result because it runs one gate-conditioned per-root pass before the outer 

resyn interleavings. TACO uses fewer nodes on fourteen of the sixteen (geomean ratios 0.990 nodes, 0.968 levels, 0.958 

NDP) at 2.6× the speed, and TACO uses 16.5 seconds in total. The one regression is sqrt , at 1.2% more nodes. Disabling each gate individually leaves that number unchanged, localiz-ing the residual difference to the commit rule. We conjecture that the difference comes from zero-gain moves accepted by the original selection strategy and declined by ours. The other published modes expose their schedule tradeoffs directly. On 

O16 , iterative TACO gives NDP 0.989 while using 1.020 nodes; 

resyn and resyn3 give NDP 1.054 and 1.072 . On U66 , the corresponding resyn /resyn3 NDPs are 0.997 and 1.002 .The four-mode summaries appear in Appendix Q. On the disjoint O16 \ D55 subset, TACO uses fewer nodes on 10/11 cases, with geomean ratios 0.990 nodes, 0.957 levels, and 

0.947 NDP. The eleven disjoint cases therefore reproduce the 16-case trend independently of the five development overlaps. The Orchestrate paper [23] also reports LocalGreedy-tuned 

resyn variants on five circuits. On those five cases, its best reported flows use 0.5–1.8% fewer nodes than TACO .Appendix Q gives that scoped comparison. 

C. The HeLO comparison 

HeLO provides reported reference values without a released implementation. TACO ’s deterministic HeLO-comparison pro-tocol uses the same Orchestrate-derived backbone, matches the available carrier/operator families and NDP objective, and evaluates every whole-circuit operator outcome. TACO -max brings the deterministic evaluation effort closer to HeLO by replacing the normal resyn pre-pass with an iterative AIG fixpoint and raising the MIG-round and time limits. It retains the gate set, selector, and action menu. Input fidelity is shown explicitly. The primary direct com-parison is the three exact-input rows. On those rows, TACO -max has an NDP geomean ratio of 0.903 ; the two re-constructed rows and disclosed near-variant row give 0.900 

when included as context. Table XII separates the three input statuses, and Table XIX gives the per-case maximum-effort results in a compact form. The iterative pre-pass can trade levels for nodes on some cases. 10 TABLE XI ORCHESTRATION COMPARISON ON THE SIXTEEN CIRCUITS REPORTED WITH O R C H E S T R A T E [23], SINGLE -PASS MODE : PER -CASE NODES , DEPTH , NDP, 

> AND SECONDS

; NODE AND RUNTIME RATIOS APPEAR IN PARENTHESES . B EST QOR VALUE PER CASE AND METRIC IS BOLD . T HE CLOSING ROWS GIVE GEOMEAN QOR RATIOS AND TOTAL SECONDS .orchestrate [23] TACO 

Case n d ndp s n (ratio) d ndp s (ratio) div 41198 4372 1.80 ×10 8 2.3 41112 ( 0.998 ) 4372 1.80 ×10 8 1.3 (0.547) hyp 207505 24803 5.15 ×10 9 27.4 207233 ( 0.999 ) 24793 5.14 ×10 9 4.3 (0.157) mem ctrl 45809 114 5.22 ×10 6 2.0 45687 ( 0.997 ) 114 5.21 ×10 6 1.1 (0.566) sqrt 19431 5058 9.83 ×10 7 1.4 19655 (1.012) 5058 9.94 ×10 7 0.7 (0.490) voter 9516 63 6.00 ×10 5 0.7 8989 ( 0.945 ) 61 5.48 ×10 5 0.4 (0.477) bfly 26106 97 2.53 ×10 6 0.9 25734 ( 0.986 ) 95 2.44 ×10 6 1.2 (1.288) dscg 25300 91 2.30 ×10 6 0.9 25077 ( 0.991 ) 92 2.31 ×10 6 1.4 (1.556) fir 24894 94 2.34 ×10 6 0.9 24608 ( 0.989 ) 89 2.19 ×10 6 1.2 (1.384) syn2 26950 90 2.43 ×10 6 0.9 26709 ( 0.991 ) 80 2.14 ×10 6 1.4 (1.573) s35932 8561 13 1.11 ×10 5 0.3 8561 (1.000) 11 9.42 ×10 4 0.1 (0.462) s38584 10365 33 3.42 ×10 5 0.4 10222 ( 0.986 ) 29 2.96 ×10 5 0.2 (0.519) b17 1 24209 93 2.25 ×10 6 0.8 24106 ( 0.996 ) 93 2.24 ×10 6 0.6 (0.729) b18 1 65250 132 8.61 ×10 6 2.3 64606 ( 0.990 ) 131 8.46 ×10 6 1.8 (0.805) b20 10093 67 6.76 ×10 5 0.4 9970 ( 0.988 ) 67 6.68 ×10 5 0.2 (0.522) b21 10203 67 6.84 ×10 5 0.4 10061 ( 0.986 ) 67 6.74 ×10 5 0.3 (0.707) b22 15103 69 1.04 ×10 6 0.6 14862 ( 0.984 ) 69 1.03 ×10 6 0.3 (0.586) Geomean ratio 1.000 (0.9897 ) 0.9681 0.9581 (0.6663) Total seconds 42.7 16.5 

TABLE XII HELO RESULTS GROUPED BY INPUT FIDELITY : EXACT INPUTS ARE THE PRIMARY DIRECT COMPARISON ; RECONSTRUCTIONS AND THE NEAR VARIANT ARE ADDITIONAL CONTEXT . E NTRIES GIVE NODES , DEPTH , NDP ( IN 10 4 ), AND SECONDS , WITH RATIOS VS HELO. HeLO [22] TACO -max Case n d ndp s† n (ratio) d (ratio) ndp (ratio) s (ratio) 

Exact input artifacts: primary comparison 

aes core 21867 18 39.4 63 19237 (0.880) 18 (1.000) 34.6 (0.880) 1941 (30.8) i2c 1385 8 1.11 21 1329 (0.960) 8 (1.000) 1.06 (0.960) 2 (0.10) mem ctrl 56592 61 345 337 64119 (1.133) 47 (0.770) 301 (0.873) 986 (2.93) 

LSOracle-OPDB reconstructions: context 

chip bridge 58317 19 111 262 62064 (1.064) 16 (0.842) 99.3 (0.896) 301 (1.15) fpu 68099 20 136 480 63956 (0.939) 19 (0.950) 122 (0.892) 481 (1.00) 

Disclosed near variant: context 

s38417 9522 16 15.2 30 8060 (0.846) 17 (1.062) 13.7 (0.899) 21 (0.70) Exact-input geomean 1.000 0.9853 0.9168 0.9032 2.0476 All-available context 1.000 0.9653 0.9319 0.8996 1.3826 

> †

Runtime note: HeLO seconds are reproduced from its paper and were measured on a different machine from ours. The runtime ratios provide cross-machine order-of-magnitude context. Same-machine speedups are reported in the orchestration comparison. 

VIII. D ISCUSSION 

A. Evidence scopes and effort settings 

Exact certification in this paper applies to a named trans-formation, semantic scope, pinned implementation, and proof obligation. A recipe identity is certified over its stated im-plementation domain; a root gate is certified only for that root evaluator; a corpus equality is a measurement. Moving between these scopes requires a separate theorem or measure-ment. 

TACO denotes the fixed registry-backed gate set, source-default engine parameters, and the stated deterministic stop-ping rules. Its Tier-2 rows retain their registered residuals. For the HeLO comparison, TACO -max replaces the normal resyn 

AIG pre-pass with an iterative fixpoint and raises the MIG-round and time limits. Whole-flow bit identity is claimed only for TACO -skip, where the two added gates are individually exact. Implementation domains require the same care. The registry contains no closure theorem for a corpus-derived box in node count, depth, fanout, or path count. Several pinned actions deliberately trade one of these coordinates for another. Corpus maxima therefore remain descriptive; a closure proof requires action-specific invariants. 

B. Why a rare survivor remains 

The cleanest boundary case is selective algebraic rewriting. On the historical 11-case record, the no-area selective variant 11 wins once, on s38417, because the area-allowed aggressive variant usually offers more. There it changes the NDP ratio to HeLO’s reported value from 1.036 without the selective pass to 0.900 with it. The registered relations retain that variant behind a cheap gate. The 31-action result is the exact one-recipe Pareto cover of Definition 2; further relations among its survivors remain open unless explicitly ruled out. 

C. Why polarity-erased structure can be insufficient 

Section IV gives the three-gate cut-4 witness. The ob-struction is operator-specific: the pair preserves the entire polarity-erased graph while pinned NPN storage, absorption, and sharing rules produce opposite evaluator outcomes. Any polarity-erased admission gate assigns the pair one decision, so soundness sends both members to dynamic evaluation. The witness fixes the structural boundary for cut-4 rewriting. The other engines also read function data, and their sparse measured wins motivate dynamic evaluation. Their impossibil-ity status remains open until a mixed fiber is exhibited. Cheap function-aware predicates and additional structural subclasses remain open as well. 

D. Three reusable proof objects 

The implementation-level semantic results form three con-nected proof objects: fixed-scope quotient relations, sound state-conditional admission predicates, and witnessed mixed-fiber obstructions. These forms apply to any optimizer satisfy-ing their premises; the pinned ABC and mockturtle trees make those premises checkable and turn the resulting relations into executable gates. Some premises, such as a discarded return or a dead guard, are individually simple. Their value comes from operator-wide accounting: the analysis fixes semantic scope, composes aliases and dominance into an exact action cover, separates non-collapsible look-alikes, and compiles the result into a controlled optimizer intervention. 

E. Trust and future verification 

Some behavior-determining facts, such as a discarded return value, a live guard, or an accounting counter, appear only in implementation code. Agentic source analysis makes that code searchable at lemma scale, and the registry makes every accepted claim traceable to its obligation and source anchor. Agents reduce the labor required for a large collection of small, source-specific obligations. The remaining verification problem is how to reduce the human validation cost. Three directions appear most useful:  

> •

verifier agents that receive formal claims and fixed source anchors;  

> •

machine-checked proofs for the implementation-independent lemmas; and  

> •

executable certificates that turn finite obligations into reproducible checks. IX. C ONCLUSION 

Pinned logic-optimization implementations admit three reusable proof objects for theory-derived compression. Afixed-scope quotient maps the 40 deployed recipe actions to a 31-action exact one-recipe Pareto cover; sound root- and pass-scoped predicates license certified gates; and an operator witness turns the mixed-fiber obstruction into a concrete admission boundary. Built on those results, TACO is a deterministic optimizer with an exact core and registered Tier-2 boundary gates. Its main executable contribution is the gate layer. TACO directly modifies the published ABC Orchestrate backbone, while 

> TACO

-max extends that deterministic backbone to the HeLO comparison’s carrier/operator protocol. 

> TACO

-skip accelerates the published orchestration algorithm while preserving bit-identical outputs. In the controlled same-backbone comparison, integrated TACO improves the orches-tration result. The HeLO summary uses exact-input rows as the primary comparison and reports reconstructed and near-variant rows separately for context. All guarantees remain tied to their stated scopes. Fur-ther relations among the 31 survivors remain open, and the integrated-system results measure TACO ’s integrated gate-conditioned selector. TACO -max retains the gate set and se-lector while using an iterative AIG pre-pass and larger MIG-round and time limits. REFERENCES [1] R. K. Brayton, G. D. Hachtel, C. T. McMullen, and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, Logic Minimization Algorithms for VLSI Synthesis . Kluwer, 1984. [2] R. K. Brayton, R. Rudell, A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, and A. Wang, “Mis: A multiple-level logic optimization system,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 1987. [3] E. M. Sentovich, K. J. Singh, C. Moon, H. Savoj, R. K. Brayton, and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, “Sis: A system for sequential circuit synthesis,” UC Berkeley, Tech. Rep., 1992. [4] A. Mishchenko, S. Chatterjee, and R. Brayton, “Dag-aware aig rewriting: A fresh look at combinational logic synthesis,” in Proc. DAC , 2006. [5] A. Mishchenko, R. Brayton, J.-H. R. Jiang, and S. Jang, “Scalable don’t-care-based logic optimization and resynthesis,” ACM Transactions on Reconfigurable Technology and Systems , 2011. [6] W. Haaswijk, A. Mishchenko, M. Soeken, and G. De Micheli, “Sat-based exact synthesis: Encodings, topology families, and parallelism,”         

> IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2020. [7] H. Riener, S.-Y. Lee, A. Mishchenko, and G. De Micheli, “Boolean rewriting strikes back: Reconvergence-driven windowing meets resyn-thesis,” in Proc. ASP-DAC , 2022. [8] S.-Y. Lee, H. Riener, A. Mishchenko, R. Brayton, and G. De Micheli, “A simulation-guided paradigm for logic synthesis and verification,”
> IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2022. [9] L. Amar` u, P.-E. Gaillardon, and G. De Micheli, “Majority-inverter graph: A new paradigm for logic optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2016. [10] E. Testa, M. Soeken, A. Zulehner, L. Amar` u, and G. De Micheli, “Logic optimization with xor-and graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2020. [11] M. Soeken, E. Testa, A. Mishchenko, and G. De Micheli, “Logic optimization with majority-inverter graphs and xor-majority graphs,”
> IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2019.

12 [12] A. Hosny, S. Hashemi, M. Shalan, and S. Reda, “Drills: Deep rein-forcement learning for logic synthesis,” in Proc. ASP-DAC , 2020, pp. 581–586. [13] W. Lau Neto et al. , “Flowtune: Practical multi-armed bandits in boolean optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Inte-grated Circuits and Systems , 2022, arXiv:2202.07721. [14] A. Grosnit, C. Malherbe, R. Tutunov, X. Wan, J. Wang, and H. Bou-Ammar, “Boils: Bayesian optimisation for logic synthesis,” in Proc. DATE , 2022, pp. 1193–1196. [15] Z. Pei, F. Liu, Z. He, G. Chen, H. Zheng, K. Zhu, and B. Yu, “Alphasyn: Logic synthesis optimization with efficient monte carlo tree search,” in 

Proc. ICCAD , 2023. [16] K. Zhu, M. Liu, H. Chen, Z. Zhao, and D. Z. Pan, “Exploring logic optimizations with reinforcement learning and graph convolutional network,” in Proc. MLCAD , 2020, pp. 145–150. [17] A. B. Chowdhury, M. Romanelli, B. Tan, R. Karri, and S. Garg, “Retrieval-guided reinforcement learning for boolean circuit minimiza-tion,” in Proc. ICLR , 2024. [18] N. Wu, J. Lee, Y. Xie, and C. Hao, “LOSTIN: Logic optimization via spatio-temporal information with hybrid graph models,” in Proc. ASAP ,2022. [19] N. Wu, Y. Li, C. Hao, S. Dai, C. Yu, and Y. Xie, “Gamora: Graph learning based symbolic reasoning for large-scale boolean networks,” in 

Proc. DAC , 2023. [20] Y. Li, A. Agnesina, Y. Zhang, H. Ren, and C. Yu, “BoolGebra: Attributed graph-learning for boolean algebraic manipulation,” in Proc. DATE ,2024. [21] W. Lau Neto, M. Austin, S. Temple, L. Amar` u, X. Tang, and P.-E. Gaillardon, “Lsoracle: a logic synthesis framework driven by artificial intelligence (invited paper),” in Proc. ICCAD , 2019. [22] Y. Pu, F. Liu, Z. He, K. Zhu, R. Fu, Z. Wang, T.-Y. Ho, and B. Yu, “Helo: A heterogeneous logic optimization framework by hierarchical clustering and graph learning,” in Proc. ISPD , 2025. [23] Y. Li, M. Liu, H. Ren, A. Mishchenko, and C. Yu, “Dag-aware synthesis orchestration,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2024, arXiv:2310.07846. [24] R. Brayton and A. Mishchenko, “Abc: An academic industrial-strength verification tool,” Proc. CAV , 2010. [25] M. Soeken, H. Riener, W. Haaswijk, E. Testa, B. Schmitz, G. Meuli, F. Mozafari, and G. De Micheli, “The epfl logic synthesis libraries,” 

Proc. IWLS , 2018. [26] N. P. Lopes, D. Menendez, S. Nagarakatte, and J. Regehr, “Provably correct peephole optimizations with alive,” in Proc. PLDI , 2015, pp. 22–32. [27] N. P. Lopes, J. Lee, C.-K. Hur, Z. Liu, and J. Regehr, “Alive2: Bounded translation validation for llvm,” in Proc. PLDI , 2021, pp. 65–79. [28] B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, M. Balog, M. P. Kumar, E. Dupont, F. J. R. Ruiz, J. S. Ellenberg, P. Wang, O. Fawzi, P. Kohli, and A. Fawzi, “Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models,” Nature , vol. 625, pp. 468–475, 2024. [29] T. H. Trinh, Y. Wu, Q. V. Le, H. He, and T. Luong, “Solving olympiad geometry without human demonstrations,” Nature , vol. 625, no. 7995, pp. 476–482, 2024. [30] K. Zhu, “Provably good prim–dijkstra revisited: New theory and a practical algorithm for a classical vlsi routing problem with llms,” 2026, arXiv:2607.17005. [31] A. Kuehlmann, V. Paruthi, F. Krohm, and M. Ganai, “Robust boolean reasoning for equivalence checking and functional property verification,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2002. 

APPENDIX 

A. The discarded-cut lemma 

Lemma (Lemma 4, restated) . Let ρ be any recipe stage that invokes cut rewriting on a state s without binding the returned network. Then Tρ(s) = s.Proof. Let κ denote the cut-rewriting operator of the pinned mockturtle tree, and let s be the persistent network on which the stage ρ acts. Two properties of the pinned operator delimit what evaluating κ can do. 

Property 1 (purity). The operator takes the network by im-mutable reference and produces its outcome as a returned value: its evaluation constructs and rewrites a separate network and assigns nothing through the input. Hence evaluating κ(s)

leaves the persistent state equal to s.

Property 2 (value guard). The returned value is a function of 

s alone: it is a rebuilt network strictly smaller than s when such a rebuild is found, and s itself otherwise, a final guard returning the input unchanged when the rebuild is not smaller. By Property 1, the persistent state after the evaluation of 

κ(s) is s. By hypothesis, ρ does not bind the returned value, so no reachable assignment consumes it: no later stage of the enclosing recipe reads κ(s), and every other stage is a pure function of the persistent state or an in-place operator on the persistent network. Induction on the remaining stages of the recipe then gives 

Tρ(s) = s. 

Since the stage is an identity, a second induction on the number of unbound cut-rewriting calls shows that deleting every such call from a recipe word leaves the word’s transition unchanged; this is the form in which Corollary 5 applies the lemma. 

B. The quotient 

For reference, the inherited universe numbers its actions H00–H39: AIG scripts H01–H05, MIG scripts H06–H08, XAG script H09, XMG script H10, and parameter variants H11–H39. 

TABLE XIII THE RECIPE UNIVERSE H00–H39, READ OFF THE PINNED SOURCES .STAGE NAMES : WØ IS A CUT -REWRITING CALL WHOSE RETURNED NETWORK IS DISCARDED (AN IDENTITY BY LEMMA 4); FR FUNCTIONAL REDUCTION ; RF REFACTORING ; RS RESUBSTITUTION ; BAL BALANCING ;

> ALG ALGEBRAIC DEPTH REWRITING

; RW AN ASSIGNED REWRITE ; XCF THE XAG CONSTANT -FANIN PASS .        

> Carrier Scripts Variants (what they change) AIG H00 noop; H01 seven WØ, two fr, one rf; H02 bal, fr, WØ, rf, bal, fr, two WØ, bal, fr, rf, WØ, fr; H11 cut-3; H12/13 zero-gain; H03 fr, WØ, rf, bal, two WØ, bal, rf; H04 bal, WØ, rs, WØ, rf, fr, rs, rf, rs, four WØ; H14 preserve-depth; H15 max pis=4; H05 fr, bal, rw, rf, bal, two rw, bal, rf, rw, bal, fr H16/17 resub budgets; H18 db; H19 sat.; H20 critical balance MIG H06 alg, then twice (alg, two WØ); H21 cut-3; H22 zero-gain; H23 preserve-depth; H07 bal, WØ, rf, bal, two WØ, bal, rf; H08 alg, bal, three WØ, bal, two WØ H24 selective; H25/26 aggressive; H27 no-area; H28 multi-NPN; H29 max pis=4; H30 critical balance XAG H09 two WØ, bal, rf, xcf H31 cut-3; H32 zero-gain; H33 preserve-depth; H34 db; H35 critical balance XMG H10 one alg H36 selective; H37/38 aggressive; H39 no-area

Corollary (Corollary 5, restated) . Eleven of the 40 actions collapse into three alias classes {H04 , H 11 , H 18 , H 19 },

{H06 , H 21 , H 22 , H 23 , H 28 }, {H09 , H 33 }, removing eight; 

13 one further action is dominated; the remaining 31 form an exact one-recipe Pareto cover. Proof. Write qh(C) = ( Nh(C), D h(C)) for the (nodes, depth) pair of the endpoint Th(C) of action h on input C, write ≤ for the coordinatewise order on such pairs, and write PF A(C) for the Pareto frontier attainable from C under the action set A.The argument has three parts: exact aliases, one dominance, and the count. 

Part 1: the alias classes. A recipe is a finite word over stages, and a recipe variant differs from its base word only in parameters bound to named stages (Table XIII). Reading the word of each class member, every differing parameter falls into exactly one of two cases. 

Case (i): the parameter binds only discarded cut-rewriting stages. This covers H11 (cut size) and H18 (NPN database) against H04 ; H21 (cut size), H22 (zero-gain acceptance), 

H23 (depth preservation), and H28 (multi-NPN resynthesis) against H06 ; and H33 (depth preservation) against H09 . In each of these words every cut-rewriting call is a WØ stage, hence an identity by Lemma 4, so no live stage reads the parameter and the committed transition is unchanged. 

Case (ii): the parameter is the saturation flag of functional reduction. This covers H19 against H04 . With the flag set, the equivalence-substitution pass is repeated while the network size counter changes. The counter is the length of the raw record storage. Substitution only marks records dead, and dead records stay allocated. Functional reduction inserts no records: every accepted substitution replaces a node by an existing signal or a constant. The counter after the mandatory pass therefore equals the counter before it, the guard never re-fires, and the saturation loop executes zero extra iterations: the flagged and default transitions coincide. In both cases the class member executes the same live stages as its representative on every state, so, pointwise, 

TH04 = TH11 = TH18 = TH19 ,TH06 = TH21 = TH22 = TH23 = TH28 ,TH09 = TH33 .

No other sibling is merged by this identity argument: each remaining variant changes a parameter that reaches at least one live stage (the cut size of live balancing, the gain or database choice of live refactoring, the depth or insertion budget of live resubstitution, or the critical-only marking of live balancing). A live read alone does not prove that endpoints differ. The two exhibited separations below establish only the additional pairs named in Proposition 6. 

Part 2: one dominance. H00 is the identity recipe, qH00 (C) = (N (C), D (C)) . H27 bridges to the MIG carrier, runs one no-area algebraic depth pass, and lowers back. The imported graph is ordered-isomorphic to H00 ’s output. Under the no-area flag the pass admits only single-fanout associativity moves, each replacing the two majority nodes of an old association by at most two new majority nodes, and no area-increasing move: a move never increases the reachable gate count and strictly improves the rewritten root level when it fires; subsequent cleanup cannot worsen either coordinate. If the lane terminates abnormally, both sides return the same incumbent. Hence 

qH27 (C) ≤ qH00 (C) for every input C, 

and H00 is dominated. Deleting it loses no frontier point. If 

qH00 (C) ∈ PF( C), then qH27 (C) ≤ qH00 (C) forces equality, since a strict inequality would contradict frontier membership. The same point is therefore attained after the deletion. 

Part 3: the count and the cover. The three classes contain 4 + 5 + 2 = 11 actions and contribute 3 representatives, removing 

8; the dominance removes one more, leaving 40 − 8 − 1 = 31 . At the one-recipe scope of Definition 2, aliases preserve every endpoint pointwise and Part 2 preserves the node–depth frontier across the dominance deletion. Minimum cardinality and arbitrary multi-step reachable sets lie outside this result. The two remaining look-alike pairs admit no further col-lapse. Because the MIG engine rejects an old-node structural-hash hit that the XMG engine accepts, the two algebraic scripts reach qH08 = (3 , 2) and qH10 = (4 , 3) on a seven-AND single-output AIG. A nine-gate witness gives qH39 = (4 , 4) 

and qH27 = (7 , 5) for the no-area twins; the converse con-tainment fails when starting from the other carrier. These witnesses refute the proposed equivalence and cover, so all four actions are retained (Proposition 6; Appendix X). Thus the 31-action frontier equality is proved over every legal recipe input. The source-level identities and dominance above establish the cover theorem. Benchmark enumeration provides a finite regression of that equality and a liveness record for the surviving representatives. 

C. Selector lemmas 

Lemma (Lemma 7(a), restated) . Ea(s, v ) ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s } for the strict-gain variant a and the zero-gain variant a′.Proof. Fix a state s and a root v under evaluation. Both vari-ants enumerate the same ordered candidate stream c1, c 2, . . . 

at v under the same gain function g; they differ in a single acceptance flag, the zero-gain variant admitting candidates with g(ci) ≥ 0 and the strict variant only candidates with 

g(ci) > 0. Each variant commits the first candidate attaining the maximal admissible gain: a later candidate supersedes an earlier one only on strictly larger gain, so the first candidate is retained on a tie. Let g∗ = max i g(ci), and let ci∗ be the first candidate with g(ci∗ ) = g∗.

Case 1: g∗ > 0. The maximum is admissible under both flags, and no zero-gain candidate attains it, so both variants commit ci∗ and Ea(s, v ) = Ea′ (s, v ).

Case 2: g∗ ≤ 0 or the stream is empty. The strict variant admits nothing and returns s; the zero-gain variant commits ci∗

if g∗ = 0 and also returns s otherwise. Either way Ea(s, v ) = 

s ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s }.The argument is unchanged when the engine proposes a single deterministic resynthesis candidate at v (the refactoring 14 family): the stream then has length one, and the two cases above are its positive-gain and nonpositive-gain outcomes. 

Lemma (Lemma 7(b)) . Ea(s, v ) ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s } for the no-area variant. Proof. Fix a state s and a root v under evaluation. Both vari-ants call the same move routine at v, which sorts the children of v in ascending level order and then evaluates guards and constructors in a fixed order: shared applicability guards (the root must be a majority node with a level gap, the deepest child more than one level above the second-deepest, and a level difference between the two deepest grandchildren), then the associativity constructor, then the distributivity constructor. The no-area flag changes exactly two things: it adds a fanout guard, requiring the deepest child to have fanout one, and it disables the distributivity constructor. Write a for the no-area and a′ for the area-allowed variant. 

Case 1: a shared guard fails. Neither variant constructs a move at v, and Ea(s, v ) = Ea′ (s, v ) = s.

Case 2: the shared guards pass and an associativity can-didate exists. If the deepest child has fanout one, the no-area guard passes as well and both variants perform the identical two-majority substitution, so Ea(s, v ) = Ea′ (s, v ). If the fanout guard fails, the no-area variant constructs nothing and 

Ea(s, v ) = s, while the area-allowed variant performs the substitution. 

Case 3: no associativity candidate exists. The no-area variant has no further constructor and Ea(s, v ) = s, while the area-allowed variant may perform the distributivity con-struction. In every case Ea(s, v ) ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s }. The same split holds for the compound XMG variant: its majority and XOR-association helpers differ from the area-allowed pass by the same fanout guard and the same disabled distribution, its mixed helper is independent of the flag, and the three helpers’ operator cases are mutually exclusive at the root, so the conclusion is unchanged. 

Lemma (Lemma 7(c)) . Ea(s, v ) ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s } for critical-only balancing. Proof. Fix a state s and a root v under evaluation. The balancing pass rebuilds the cone of each visited root from the rebalancing candidates of its cut, choosing the lexicographic (level, size) minimum among them; the original cone is never a candidate. The critical-only flag changes exactly one thing: the set of visited roots is restricted to the marked critical path, and every off-critical node is cloned, its cone copied verbatim. 

Case 1: v is marked critical. Both variants call the same rebuild at v: the same carrier and cut size, hence the same cut and the same rebalancing candidates, and the same lexi-cographic acceptance. They commit the same replacement, so 

Ea(s, v ) = Ea′ (s, v ).

Case 2: v is off-critical. The critical-only variant copies v

without rebalancing, so its local endpoint is Ea(s, v ) = s,while the all-node variant may rebuild the cone. Either way 

Ea(s, v ) ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s }.Hence every commit of the critical-only pass is also commit-ted by the all-node pass at the same root, or is the identity. 

Lemma (Lemma 7(d)) . Rk ⪯ { Rk+1 } for insertion budgets 

k ∈ { 0, 1}.Proof. Fix a state s and a root v under evaluation, and let 

m = |MFFC( v)|. The engine evaluates candidate tiers in a fixed order of increasing insertion count: the zero-insertion tiers (constant collapse, then equal divisor), then the one-insertion tier, then the two-insertion tiers; it returns the first tier that yields an admissible candidate, and the stop-gate after a failed tier reads only the budget and m: a (k+1) -insertion tier is attempted only when the budget exceeds k and m ≥ k + 2 .No tier body depends on the budget: the divisors, the level filters, and the candidate graphs of a tier are functions of the state alone. The attempt sequence of Rk at v is therefore a prefix of the attempt sequence of Rk+1 .

Case 1: Rk succeeds. Let tier j ≤ k be the first tier yielding an admissible candidate c. Under Rk+1 the tiers 0, . . . , j − 1

fail identically, their bodies being budget-independent, and tier 

j yields the same c; hence ERk+1 (s, v ) = ERk (s, v ).

Case 2: Rk fails every tier up to k. Then Rk returns no candidate and ERk (s, v ) = s, while Rk+1 either succeeds at tier k+1 or also returns s. Either way ERk (s, v ) = s ∈{ERk+1 (s, v ), s }.Hence Rk ⪯ { Rk+1 } in the sense of Definition 1. 

Lemma (Lemma 7(e)) . A 4-leaf refactoring cone limit adds no endpoints beyond the default 6-leaf variant. Proof. Fix a state s and a root v under evaluation. Both variants run the same refactoring engine at v with the same resynthesis library, the same gain mode, and the same accep-tance rule; they differ only in the applicability guard, which skips the root when the enumerated cone has more leaves than the limit, 4 for a and 6 for the default variant a′. Every other guard (the cone size floor, the rejection of a resynthesis that hashes to the old root, the strictly positive gain acceptance) is shared. Let ℓ be the cone’s leaf count. 

Case 1: ℓ ≤ 4. Both guards admit the root, and the resynthesis callback receives identical inputs: the same leaves, the same cone truth table, the same library, and the same gain mode. It constructs the same candidate and accepts or rejects it identically, so Ea(s, v ) = Ea′ (s, v ).

Case 2: 4 < ℓ ≤ 6. The 4-leaf guard skips the root and Ea(s, v ) = s, while the 6-leaf variant may act. Hence 

Ea(s, v ) = s ∈ { Ea′ (s, v ), s }.

Case 3: ℓ > 6. Both guards skip the root and Ea(s, v ) = 

Ea′ (s, v ) = s.The limit therefore affects only the applicability guard. The default variant applies the same resynthesis procedure to every cone admitted by the smaller limit. 

D. Gain-form theorems 

Lemma (Lemma 8, restated) . Any resubstitution candidate has gain at least 1.

15 Proof. Fix a state s and a root v under evaluation, and let 

m = |MFFC( v)| be the size of the root’s fanout-free cone. The cone contains v itself, so m ≥ 1. The engine evaluates candidate tiers in increasing insertion count and reports, for a candidate of tier j, the gain g = m − j. We show by induction over the reached tiers that every returned candidate has g ≥ 1.

Tier 0: constant collapse or equal divisor. No node is inserted, and the gain equals the cone size: g = m ≥ 1.

Tier 1: one inserted node. This tier is evaluated only past the first stop-gate, which blocks it whenever m = 1 ; hence 

m ≥ 2 and g = m − 1 ≥ 1.

Tier 2: two inserted nodes. This tier is evaluated only past the second stop-gate, which blocks it whenever m = 2 ; hence 

m ≥ 3 and g = m − 2 ≥ 1.

Tier 3. The deployed insertion budget is two, so this tier is unreachable; at a budget of three its stop-gate would still require m ≥ 4, giving g = m − 3 ≥ 1.Every reachable tier therefore has gain at least one, so 

g(c) ≥ 1 for every candidate c. The reported gain is, moreover, a lower bound on the realized node reduction: insertions are hashed against existing nodes, and any such reuse only reduces the fresh-node count below the tier value, so the committed change obeys the same bound. 

Lemma (Lemma 9, restated) . Rewrite and refactoring gains satisfy 0 ≤ g(c) ≤ | MFFC( v)|.Proof. Fix a state s and a root v under evaluation. For a rewrite candidate let s(v) be the number of nodes the replacement would save, the size of the cut-relative fanout-free cone defined below; for a refactoring candidate let s(v) = |MFFC( v)|. In both engines a candidate c has gain g(c) = s(v) − a(c), where 

a(c) counts the fresh nodes the replacement inserts. 

Lower bound. The insertion counter runs with its budget set equal to the saved count s(v) and rejects the candidate as soon as the count would exceed that budget, so every accepted candidate has a(c) ≤ s(v) and 

g(c) = s(v) − a(c) ≥ 0.

Upper bound. Since a(c) ≥ 0, g(c) ≤ s(v); for refactoring 

s(v) = |MFFC( v)| and the bound is immediate. For rewriting, the saved count is computed relative to a cut C of v: reference counts are initialized from the current fanouts, each occurrence of a cut leaf is charged one extra reference, and the cut-relative cone MFFC C (v) is the set of nodes whose count reaches zero in the dereference cascade from v. We claim 

MFFC C (v) ⊆ MFFC( v). Write r0(n) for the plain counts and r1(n) for the bumped counts, so r1(n) ≥ r0(n) for every node n, and let D0 and D1 be the deleted sets of the two cascades from v. Both cascades delete v unconditionally and then delete a node exactly when its accumulated decrements exhaust its count, each deletion decrementing the node’s fanins. Consider the nodes of D1 in the bumped cascade’s deletion order, and suppose every node deleted before n lies in 

D0. The fanouts whose deletions zero n in the bumped cascade are deleted before n, hence lie in D0 by the hypothesis, and each of those deletions decrements n in the plain cascade as well. The number of decrements n receives in the plain cascade is therefore at least the number it receives in the bumped one, namely r1(n) ≥ r0(n), so n is zeroed in the plain cascade and n ∈ D0. By induction D1 ⊆ D0, and 

g(c) ≤ s(v) = |MFFC C (v)| ≤ | MFFC( v)|.

E. The complete universal table 

Table XIV records each state-independent compression used in the action set: the relation, the mechanism that proves it, and the stable claim ID. Through the released artifact manifest, each ID links to its proof, audit record, pinned source anchors, and finite checker where applicable. The first block is the quotient of Corollary 5: three alias classes and one dominance take the 40 recipe actions to a 31-action exact cover. The last block lists the pairs on which that cover is sharp (Proposition 6). 

TABLE XIV THE COMPLETE UNIVERSAL TABLE : STATE -INDEPENDENT CONTAINMENTS , ALIASES , AND COVERS USED IN THE ACTION SET , WITH THEIR PROVING MECHANISMS AND STABLE CLAIM ID S.                            

> Relation Mechanism Stable ID
> Recipe universe H00–H39
> Unbound cut-rewrite stage ≡I
> Discarded return value; a final guard returns the input when not smaller U-DC Saturation variants ≡
> defaults Append-only size counter; the saturation loop runs zero extra iterations U-SAT Alias classes {H04 ,
> H11 ,H18 ,H19 };
> {H06 ,H21 ,H22 ,
> H23 ,H28 };{H09 ,
> H33 }
> Differing parameters feed only identity stages (Lemma 4) or the inert saturation flag U-ALIASES
> H27 dominates H00 No-area dfs contracts fanout-1 chains; coordinatewise nonworsening U-H00 Exact cover of 31 actions (P31) Classes remove eight, dominance removes H00; frontier preserved on every input U-Q31
> Engine variants (one engine, one flag)
> Strict-gain variants
> ⪯ { zero-gain , I }
> One acceptance flag; the strict variant reaches either the zero-gain variant’s endpoint or I(rw −, rf −,B6 −, D6 −, X4 −)U-STRICT No-area algebraic
> ⪯ { area-allowed , I }
> Fanout-1 parents only: a subset of the area-allowed substitutions U-NOAREA Critical-only balance
> ⪯ { all-node , I }
> Visits only the critical roots under the same lexicographic acceptance U-CRITBAL
> R0⪯R1⪯R2
> (0/1-insert ⪯2-insert) Budgets tried in increasing order with stop-gates, so the first successful tiers are nested U-RBUDGET 4-Leaf refactor
> D4⪯ { D6, I }
> Guard-only limit; admitted cones are factored by the 6-leaf variant U-D4 3-Leaf cut rewriting dominated by 4-leaf The 4-leaf variant enumerates a candidate superset and commits the strictly best gain U-CUT34
> Kept distinct
> H08 ̸≡H10 Old-node hash hit excluded by the MIG engine, not by the XMG one; (3,2) vs (4,3) exhibited U-MIGXMG
> H27 does not dominate
> H39
> Unguarded old-node hash reverses the no-area twins; (7,5) vs (4,4) exhibited U-NATWINS

16 F. R2p on critical roots 

Theorem (Theorem 12, restated) . Let R be free resubstitu-tion and R∗ its depth-preserving variant with required level clamped to ℓ(v). If v is critical, then ER∗ (s, v ) = ER(s, v ).Proof. Write ρ for the required-level parameter of one resub-stitution evaluation at the root v of s: the free variant R runs with ρ = r(v), the required level of v, while R∗ overrides the arrival-time budget so that the evaluation runs with ρ = ℓ(v).Everything else about the two runs is the same: the same root, the same cut and leaf set, the same window cone and its fanout-free cone, the same simulation words, and the same candidate ladder, which tries tiers in a fixed order (constant, equal divisor, one insertion, two insertions) and returns the first firing tier. The parameter ρ enters the pipeline only as a level threshold on divisor admission, in exactly four places. A fanout-expanded divisor d collected from the window is admitted if and only if 

ℓ(d) ≤ ρ;

a divisor d enters the single-divisor bank if and only if ℓ(d) ≤

ρ − 1; a pair (d1, d 2) enters the two-divisor bank if and only if ℓ(di) ≤ ρ − 2 for i = 1 , 2; and the divisor combination underlying an accepted candidate must have level at most ρ−1.Let v be critical, that is, r(v) = ℓ(v). Then the two runs share the same value of ρ; every threshold above admits exactly the same divisors into exactly the same banks, the ladder enumerates the same candidates in the same order, and first-success acceptance returns the same candidate in both runs, or none in both. Hence ER∗ (s, v ) = ER(s, v ).On a slack root, where r(v) > ℓ(v), the thresholds of 

R∗ are strictly tighter and the two variants can diverge; the per-tier level bounds sharpen the picture. At ρ = ℓ(v) every candidate kind has level at most ℓ(v): a constant has level 0,an equal divisor has level at most ρ, a one-insertion candidate is built on a divisor of level at most ρ − 1, and a two-insertion candidate on pair members of level at most ρ−2. Consequently no candidate on a critical root can raise the root level, so the deployed gate’s offer condition (the free candidate raised the root level) is vacuous exactly on the coincidence region and confines the evaluation of R∗ to the slack region, where divergence is possible. One residual is documented within that region: divisor banks are truncated at fixed size caps, the free variant’s looser collection binds a cap strictly earlier, and the clamped variant can then admit divisors the free variant never reached; covering those residual wins would require evaluating 

R∗ on every slack root, so the deployed gate forgoes them. 

G. Level-gap guard 

Theorem (Theorem 13, restated) . If no node satisfies the level-gap condition, all three algebraic strategies act as I.Proof. Abbreviate the gap predicate of the statement by 

G(n) : ⇐⇒ ℓ(deep( n)) > ℓ (second( n)) + 1 .

The three strategies differ only in which nodes they visit: depth-first visits the maximum-level output cones, selective the critical-path nodes, and aggressive all nodes. They share a single mutation primitive: each changes the network only by calling one reassociation routine rd on a visited node. At a node n, the routine orders the children in ascending order of level and may mutate the network only if all of the following hold: (i) n is a majority gate and its deepest child c = deep( n) is a majority gate; (ii) ℓ(c) > ℓ (second( n)) + 1 , that is, G(n);(iii) the two deepest children of c differ in level; and the selective strategy, which may not increase area, additionally requires (iv) that c have a single fanout and (v) that one of n’s two shallow children be the same node as one of c’s two shallow grandchildren. In particular, for every strategy and every node n, a mutation at n implies G(n).Suppose that no node of s satisfies G, and consider any one of the three strategies, visiting n1, n 2, . . . in its order. We prove by induction on k that the network after the visit to nk is s. The base k = 0 is trivial. For the step, the network before the visit to nk is s by the induction hypothesis, so the routine evaluates its guard on s: if (i) holds then (ii) fails by assumption, and if (i) fails the routine already stops there; in both cases rd returns without mutating anything, and the network after the visit is again s. Hence each strategy terminates with the network s:it acts as I on s.Skipping such a pass preserves the trajectory: the surround-ing loop adopts a pass’s output only when it strictly improves on the incumbent network, and an identity pass returns the incumbent itself, so the skipped evaluation never changes the sequence of committed states. 

H. No-4-cut 

Theorem (Theorem 14, restated) . If ℓ(v) = 2 and one fanin of 

v is a primary input, the rewrite engine proposes no candidate at v.Proof. Let v be a node with ℓ(v) = 2 and with one fanin u aprimary input, and let w be the other fanin. Since ℓ(v) = 2 ,the node v is an AND gate, and levels are unit cost, so ℓ(v) = 1 + max {ℓ(u), ℓ (w)} and ℓ(w) ≤ 1. Recall the cut lists the engine maintains. A combinational input x (a primary input or a constant) owns exactly one cut, the trivial cut {x}; an AND gate z with fanins z0, z 1 owns 

C(z) = {z} ∪  c0 ∪ c1 : ci ∈ C (zi), |c0 ∪ c1| ≤ 4 ,

the union running over the fanin cut lists and truncated by the four-leaf merge cap. Every non-trivial cut of v therefore has the form {u} ∪ c

with c ∈ C (w), since C(u) = {{ u}} . There are two cases. If 

ℓ(w) = 0 , then w is a combinational input, C(w) = {{ w}} ,and the only merged cut is {u, w }, with two leaves. If ℓ(w) = 1, then w is an AND gate whose fanins x0, x 1 have level 

0 and are combinational inputs, so C(w) = {{ w}, {x0, x 1}} 

and the merged cuts of v are {u, w } and {u, x 0, x 1}. In all cases, every cut of v has at most 1 + 2 = 3 leaves. The condition is exact: if both fanins are level-1 AND gates, the 17 merge {x0, x 1} ∪ { x′

> 0

, x ′

> 1

} has four leaves whenever the four fanins are distinct, and is then evaluated. The evaluation loop of the rewrite engine considers only cuts with exactly four leaves: it discards every enumerated cut with fewer than 4 leaves, and the merge cap forbids more than 4. Consequently the loop evaluates no cut of 

v, and the engine returns no candidate. The deployed skip evaluates the two hypotheses of the theorem in constant time on the node’s cached level field; the flow maintains levels through every commit, so the cached field equals the structural level, and it hands the engine a structurally hashed network whose identifiers follow topological order. This network is produced by structural hashing immediately before the pass, so the cached cuts are fresh wherever the skip runs. The skip therefore replicates the engine’s return exactly. 

I. Cut4 certificates 

Theorem (Theorem 15, restated) . The pass fires at n through a genuine cut only if the replacement’s unreferenced gate count is below |MFFC( n)|, and the count is at most the stored class size s∗.Proof. The pass makes one topological sweep over the gates of the network. At a gate n it computes V (n) := |MFFC( n)|

exactly, by DAG-aware reference counting, and if V (n) = 1 

it copies n unchanged without consulting any cut. Other-wise it enumerates the cuts of n; truth-table minimization discards every cut whose function ignores enough leaves to drop the support below 3, and each surviving ( genuine ) cut 

c is resynthesized: the cut function is canonicalized to its NPN class, and the class’s stored database form of s∗ gates is instantiated as the replacement cone. Write u(c) for the number of gates of that cone that are unreferenced outside it (the unreferenced count of Table XV), the replacement root counted unconditionally. The candidate’s gain and acceptance rule are 

g(n, c ) = V (n) − u(c), c accepted ⇐⇒ g(n, c ) ≥ 1.

Hence the pass fires at n through c only if u(c) < V (n) = 

|MFFC( n)|, the first claim. The replacement cone realizes the stored form with at most s∗ gates, and the unreferenced count enumerates a subset of them, so u(c) ≤ s∗, the second claim; and u(c) ≥ 1 for genuine cuts, because the root is counted unconditionally and a class of support at least 3 stores a genuine gate at its root. Two consequences follow. (i) On a one-record cone, V (n) = 1, the sweep copies n verbatim and offers nothing; the ac-counting agrees, since g(n, c ) ≤ 1−1 = 0 . (ii) The decoded 4-variable table has 222 NPN classes with stored-size histogram 

{0:2 , 1:2 , 2:5 , 3:18 , 4:42 , 5:117 , 6:35 , 7:1 }

and the maximum stored size is max s∗ = 7 , so g(n, c ) ≥

V (n) − 7, and any node with V (n) ≥ 8 and a genuine cut admits an offer. Firing requires V (n) ≥ 2 (because u(c) ≥ 1), and between the bounds 2 ≤ V (n) ≤ 7 it requires u(c) ≤

V (n) − 1; since only 27 of the 222 classes have s∗ ≤ 3 while 

88% have s∗ ≥ 4, the firing region is essentially V (n) ∈ [2 , 7] 

crossed with the cuts of the s∗ ≤ 3 classes. The pass is node-count monotone overall: acceptance de-mands strictly positive gain, and a final guard returns the orig-inal network unchanged whenever the rebuild is not smaller, so the pass can never increase the node count. Skipping it may forfeit rare improvements but cannot alter functional correctness. The converse of the firing condition fails in exactly one way, through structural hashing: when a fragment of the replacement cone already exists in the network with references elsewhere, that fragment is not unreferenced, so 

u(c) drops strictly below s∗ and the pass can fire even when 

s∗ ≥ V (n); only the unconditional count of the replacement root keeps a hit on the root itself from escaping the count. 

J. The XMG trigger 

Theorem (Theorem 16, restated) . If the XMG and MIG majority components first diverge, the immediately preceding common state contains an adjacent node–parent pair sharing a fanin. If no such pair occurs along their common execution trace, the pass endpoints coincide. Proof. Run both algebraic passes on the same network s. In the deployed setting the XMG side carries no XOR records, since its lane is entered from a majority-only import, so the XMG engine’s XOR-guarded helpers never fire and its pass reduces to the majority component it shares with the MIG engine: the same reassociation rules, applied in the same order, through the same substitution machinery. That machinery is one structural hash table. When a node n is replaced by an equivalent signal m, every parent p of n is rebuilt with 

m substituted for n, and the rebuilt signature (the operator together with the children as a multiset of full signals) is looked up in the table so that an existing node is reused. The engines differ in exactly one rule of this step: if the lookup returns the node n being replaced, whose table entry is still live during the pass, the MIG engine rejects the hit and updates the child in place, whereas the XMG engine accepts the returned node. The passes can therefore diverge only at a substitution where some rebuilt parent carries exactly the signature of the replaced node n; call such an event a collision .A collision forces a shared fanin. Let n have children multiset C with |C| = k (k = 2 in the AND encoding, k = 3 

for majority), and suppose the rebuild of a parent p collides with n. The rebuild has the same operator as n and children multiset (Cp \ { n}) ∪ { m}, where Cp is p’s children multiset; equality with C as multisets forces 

m ∈ C and Cp =  C \ { m} ∪ { n},

so p already carries every child of n except possibly the substituted one: the pair (n, p ) shares k − 1 ≥ 1 fanins. The witness shape is the self-referential pair n = and( x, y ),

p = and( n, x ): replacing n by its child m = y rebuilds p as 

and( y, x ), which is n’s signature (Fig. 2). In majority signals the same shape is p = maj( x, y, n ) with n = maj( x, y, c ),two shared fanins, and it is functionally redundant, since 

maj( x, y, maj( x, y, c )) = maj( x, y, c ) by idempotence. 18 TABLE XV THE PREDICATE SET DEPLOYED BY INTEGRATED TACO AND TACO -SKIP . K INDS FOLLOW DEFINITION 11; T IER -2 ROWS RETAIN SEPARATE EVIDENCE CONTRACTS . S TABLE ID S MAP TO THE RELEASED CLAIM MANIFEST . s∗ IS THE STORED CLASS SIZE OF THM . 15.                                                                                       

> Gate Checkable predicate Kind Stable ID Final evidence
> AIG side
> P1 RW/RF skip Root |MFFC |= 1 (both fanins fanout ≥2or PI) Tier-2 cover G-P1 RS covers the stated core; two residual classes make the
> H6QoR sign case-dependent in integrated TACO
> P2 RF skip Root |MFFC | ≤ 2Tier-2 G-P2 RS territory; blocks gain-0 depth moves and some gain-1 wins in integrated TACO
> P3 fanout guard Root fanout >1000 (a guard in the resubstitu-tion source) Tier-2 G-P3 Whole-root degradation guard; neutral on all six final cases P4 depth-preserving resub skip
> vcritical (required level =ℓ(v))Dedupe G-P4 Bit-identical; no redundant evaluations on critical roots P9 no-4-cut RW skip ℓ(v) = 2 with a PI fanin (G-RW: also ℓ(v)≤
> 1)Sterile G-RW Bit-identical on i2c and s38417, including gate timing; 98 skips on i2c G-RF identity skip va genuine 2-input AND of two distinct non-constant PI nodes Sterile G-RF Used only by TACO -skip; G-RF alone is bit-identical on 66/66 circuits and reduces time by 11%
> MIG side
> P5 ′algebraic skip No MAJ node with MAJ-child gap >1and grandchild split; selective adds fanout-1, shared indices Sterile G-P5 Exact; bit-identical on all six final cases P6 XMG boundary skip No trigger pair (adjacent node-parent fanin shar-ing); re-checked at each pass boundary Tier-2 G-P6 s38417 ungated 137173 vs 136918 gated; other five cases unchanged P12 XMG-dfs iden-tity XMG lane entry without MAJ-precondition node (AIG bridge gives xor3-free entry) Sterile G-P12 Exact; bit-identical on all six final cases E1-E3 cut4 certifi-cates E1: gate-fanins fanout ≥2; E2: |MFFC( n)|=1; E3: no cut ≥3after tt-min. Sterile G-E1E5 E1 registered, not implemented (low trigger rate); E2 engine-internal E4-E5 cut4 fire region E4: fires only if value2 (c)<|MFFC( n)|,value2 ≤s∗; E5: |MFFC( n)|> s ∗forces an offer for a genuine cut Accounting G-E1E5 Live on fpu, chip bridge, ethernet: 5 commits out of 20 offers (11-case record)
> XAG side
> XAG-CF skip No XOR node in the state (xor-count zero) Sterile G-XAGCF Identity on XOR-free states

Consider the first step at which the two executions differ. Before that step their states and selected substitutions are identical (same start, rules, and visit order), so their distinct outcomes can arise only from the sole difference in hash-hit handling. The step must therefore contain a collision, and the multiset argument above implies that the common state immediately before the step contains the stated adjacent pair. Contrapositively, if no intermediate common state contains the pair, no first divergence exists and the pass endpoints coincide. The shape is local, but a reassociation can manufacture it while a pass runs. An entry- or boundary-state absence check is therefore not a trajectory-certified pass-level dedupe gate. P6 rechecks the shape after the XMG DFS stage and uses it as a source-derived Tier-2 gate. It is retained in TACO with this registered residual. 

K. The complete predicate set 

Table XV lists the predicate set deployed by integrated 

TACO and TACO -skip: each gate’s checkable form, its kind under Definition 11, its stable claim ID, and its final evidence. The runtime names map to stable gate IDs as follows: P4 →G-P4, P9 →G-RW, P5 ′→G-P5, P6 →G-P6, P12 →G-P12, and E1– E5 →G-E1E5. G-RF is the RF 2-PI-cone skip of Table VIII. The corresponding theorems are listed in Table IV. Where a theorem covers only a named region, the retained residual appears in the last column. The accounting row bounds what the cut-4 pass can return without skipping evaluations. Stable IDs resolve through the released artifact manifest. 

L. The polarity-erased fiber obstruction 

Recall that σ retains the full typed, rooted multigraph but erases edge polarity and primary-input names (Definition 10). For a fixed operator and scope, let ze(x) = 1 exactly when the endpoint on x is the identity. 

Theorem (Theorem 18, restated) . If σ(x0) = σ(x1) and 

ze(x0)̸ = ze(x1), no predicate that factors through σ is both sound and complete for e’s identity region on a domain containing x0 and x1.Proof. If π = bπ ◦ σ, then π(x0) = π(x1). Soundness and completeness would instead require π(xi) = ze(xi) for both inputs, which is impossible because the two values of ze differ. 

Exhibited cut-4 fiber: Let m1 = maj( a, b, c ), m2 =maj( m1, a, b ), and n = maj( m1, m 2, d ). With plain edges, majority absorption gives m2 ≡ m1, so the root is in the one-gate majority class while its removable cone has two records; the cut-4 evaluator offers positive gain. Complement only the 

m1 → m2 edge. The polarity-erased graph, levels, fanouts, and cone sizes are unchanged, but the root becomes a genuine four-variable class whose stored form costs at least the two-record cone when no external hash reuse is present; the evaluator offers nothing. The decoded NPN table and both verdicts are independently checked in the artifact. Thus Theorem 18 applies to cut-4 rewriting. Table XVI separates that proved mixed fiber from the operators for which this paper establishes only source-level function dependence. 19 TABLE XVI WHAT IS PROVED ABOUT THE FUNCTION -DEPENDENT RESIDUE . S OURCE DEPENDENCE IDENTIFIES THE DISCRIMINATOR ; ONLY AN EXHIBITED MIXED σ-FIBER INVOKES THEOREM 18.                   

> Operator Function discriminator Evidence in this paper Cut-4 rewriting NPN class of the cut truth table and unreferenced stored form Mixed fiber exhibited; ob-struction proved Akers refactoring Resynthesis of the cone truth ta-ble Source dependence estab-lished; mixed-fiber witness remains open SOP balancing ISOP cover of the cut truth Source dependence estab-lished; mixed-fiber witness remains open ABC/MIG resubstitution Truth containment/equality or window simulation Source dependence estab-lished; mixed-fiber witness remains open ABC rewriting Four-cut NPN class Source dependence estab-lished; mixed-fiber witness remains open

Remark 19 (scope) . The theorem applies where a mixed fiber is witnessed. For the other operators, source-level function dependence identifies the missing information but does not by itself exhibit such a fiber. Further structural subclasses and inexpensive function-aware predicates also remain open. 

M. Limits of corpus envelopes 

A natural formal route is to define a circuit class that contains the corpus and is preserved by all forty actions, so that operator relations can be proved once for the class. A typical construction begins with a simple coordinate envelope. Let N , D, F , and P denote node count, depth, maximum fanout, and a fixed input–output path count, respectively. A 

simple coordinate envelope is a finite conjunction of bounds 

q(s) ≤ bq , with q drawn from a subset of these coordinates. No registered invariant establishes that the forty actions preserve a box obtained from corpus maxima. The pinned implementations contain mechanisms that make such preser-vation nontrivial: depth-motivated balancing may add gates, default resubstitution admits level-raising replacements, refac-toring has no depth-acceptance guard, and divisor reuse and restructuring alter fanout and path multiplicity. They motivate the action-specific invariance requirement below. Accordingly, corpus maxima and other finite coordinate boxes remain descriptive until accompanied by an action-specific invariance proof. The formal statements quantify over legal implementation states or explicitly named subsets. 

N. A complete closed-set example 

A formally complete construction makes this limitation concrete. It satisfies the usual set-theoretic requirements while carrying almost no information about optimization. 

Example 20 (normal-quotient universe) . Let UMIG be all finite ordered combinational MIGs. Define a normalizer N by four deterministic steps: 1) reduce the one-node identities maj( x, x, y ) = x and 

maj( x, ¯x, y ) = y;2) sort fanins and structurally hash identical majority triples; 3) delete nodes unreachable from the ordered outputs; and 4) canonically relabel nodes by ASAP depth and then by their canonical fanin triples, preserving PI and PO order. No reassociation, balancing, rewriting, refactoring, resubsti-tution, or SAT sweeping occurs in N . The procedure is deterministic, semantics preserving, and idempotent. Define 

SN = {C ∈ U MIG : N (C) = C}, bTa = N ◦ Ta,

where Ta(C) is any committed successor of recipe action a

that returns a finite ordered MIG. Each AIG anchor enters the set through N ◦LAIG →MIG , with L(and( x, y )) = maj(0 , x, y ).

Proposition 21 (closure by construction) . For every C ∈UMIG and every admitted successor Ta(C),

bTa(C) ∈ S N .

Consequently, SN is forward closed under every normalized transition bTa.Proof. Idempotence gives N ( bTa(C)) = N (N (Ta(C))) =

N (Ta(C)) = bTa(C). Thus the normalized successor is a fixed point of N .The set is also proper in the formal sense: it contains live irreducible majority chains of unbounded size and depth. Scalable nonmember families result from adding unreachable logic, structurally duplicate gates, or maj( x, x, y ) identity wrappers; N removes each defect. Membership is exactly decidable by normalize-and-compare, with no fitted constants. All circuits in the historical 55-case set belong to SN after normalization. 

Remark 22 (why the construction is trivial) . The proof never uses C ∈ S N , any property of a, or any quality measure: appending N to the transition forces every successor into the set. Moreover, SN excludes only representation garbage and identifier order; every Boolean function has a representative in it. On the 55 anchors, N removed zero logic nodes, so its only observed effect there was canonical relabeling. The construction is a nonempty, proper, forward-closed circuit set. Its closure nevertheless says nothing about which operator to run or what quality it can achieve. Its certificate attaches to the normalization wrapper; deployed optimization choices require their own relations. Functional correctness of an action is a separate obligation; the proposition assumes only an admitted MIG successor. 

O. The open register 

The scoped results above leave several concrete directions open:  

> •

Mixed-fiber witnesses for the function-dependent opera-tors listed as open in Table XVI.  

> •

Function-aware predicates between structural gates and the full engines.  

> •

The minimum certified basis over per-root selection modes, currently only loosely bounded.  

> •

Aggressive versus selective algebraic rewriting under finite-factor simulation in either direction. 20 • Database size-optimality for stored sizes 5–7 (verified exactly through size 4; sizes 5–7 currently rely on the database entries).  

> •

Ablations of each lane’s role and the remaining rewrite– refactoring and resubstitution–refactoring containment edges. 

P. Bit-identity on all 66 circuits 

The gated variant produces outputs bit-identical to those of the published algorithm on all 66 circuits; total runtime over the set decreases from 38.2 s to 34.0 s in the bit-identity harness. No case shows a QoR difference under either gate, alone or combined. 

Q. All-mode geomeans against orchestrate 

Tables XVII and XVIII report geomean ratios of TACO 

to orchestrate [23] in each of its four modes, over the sixteen paper circuits and over the full 66-circuit set respectively. The gap is largest in the single-pass mode. The iterative mode trades about 2% more nodes for 3–4% fewer levels and stays ahead on NDP. Its commit rule continues to accept level-reducing moves at the fixed point, producing this node–level exchange. The resyn interleavings run 4–7% deeper on the sixteen paper circuits. Both final harnesses use the default level-preserving engine settings. The two flows share this setting, while their selection and commit rules differ; on this subset, the extra depth buys no area. The baseline in the body is the published Orchestrate algorithm, invoked by the ABC command orchestrate . The paper additionally reports LocalGreedy-tuned resyn variants on five circuits. For context, those best-reported flows use 0.5–1.8% fewer nodes than TACO on the five cases. The same mechanism appears in sqrt : those flows commit zero-gain moves freely, and our commit rule does not. Over the full 66-circuit set the node geomeans are at parity with or below the baseline. Per-case numbers for every run are released in the artifact’s output files. 

TABLE XVII GEOMEAN RATIOS OF TACO TO O R C H E S T R A T E , SIXTEEN PAPER CIRCUITS . W INS COUNT STRICTLY SMALLER NODE COUNTS .                               

> Mode Nodes Levels NDP Wins/16 TACO sSpeedup Single 0.9897 0.9681 0.9581 14 16.5 2.6×
> Iterative 1.0203 0.9695 0.9891 494.6 1.6×
> Resyn 1.0008 1.0534 1.0543 841.5 2.7×
> Resyn3 1.0023 1.0691 1.0715 10 64.8 2.3×

TABLE XVIII GEOMEAN RATIOS OF TACO TO O R C H E S T R A T E , FULL 66-CIRCUIT SET .WINS COUNT STRICTLY SMALLER NODE COUNTS .                               

> Mode Nodes Levels NDP Wins/66 TACO sSpeedup Single 0.9879 0.9515 0.9400 36 37.8 1.9×
> Iterative 1.0001 0.9564 0.9564 25 140.7 1.6×
> Resyn 0.9942 1.0028 0.9970 26 97.5 1.9×
> Resyn3 0.9944 1.0072 1.0015 27 154.6 1.6×

R. Effort details 

All reported seconds are per-case wall times on one x86-64 macOS host; totals are sums over cases. Over the 66 circuits, the pass counts are 66 for single (one per case), 193 for iterative (at most 10 per case), 198 for resyn, and 330 for resyn3. Per-case times appear in the body tables and released artifact; engine-level evaluation counts are printed in each run’s CGO_RESULT log. 

S. TACO -max results against HeLO, per case 

Table XIX reports the deterministic maximum-effort track against HeLO’s published values. E denotes an exact input, R a reconstruction, and V the disclosed near variant; only E enters the primary direct geomean. 

TABLE XIX HELO SET , PER CASE : TACO -MAX VERSUS HELO’ S REPORTED VALUES .THE NDP COLUMN IS FOR TACO -MAX , AND NDP/H ELO IS ITS RATIO TO 

HELO’ S PUBLISHED NDP. E DENOTES AN EXACT INPUT , R ARECONSTRUCTION , AND V A NEAR VARIANT .                                                  

> Case In HeLO n/d TACO -max n/d NDP NDP/HeLO s aes core E21867/18 19237/18 3.46 ×10 50.880 1941 i2c E1385/8 1329/8 1.06 ×10 40.960 2mem ctrl E56592/61 64119/47 3.01 ×10 60.873 986 chip bridge R58317/19 62064/16 9.93 ×10 50.896 301 fpu R68099/20 63956/19 1.22 ×10 60.892 481 s38417 V9522/16 8060/17 1.37 ×10 50.899 21 Exact geomean E –––0.903 –All context E/R/V – ––0.900 –

T. The Optional Fast Extension 

The main-paper configuration uses source-default engine parameters and the stated deterministic stopping rules. The re-leased implementation also provides TACO -fast, a deterministic empirical overlay for runtime-sensitive use. It retains GTACO ,the residual operator set, the selector, the lane order, and the strict-NDP commit rule. The overlay changes the evaluation policy through tuned AIG bounds, an early iterative stop, and four stateful yield gates. TACO -fast at maximum effort applies the same overlay with the iterative AIG pre-pass and the larger MIG-round and time limits of TACO -max. 

1) Configuration and evidence contract: Table XX gives the complete configuration delta. The normal-effort HeLO-comparison recipe is cgo -M 2; cgo_mig ; the maximum-effort recipe is cgo -M 1 -P 20; cgo_mig -R 60 -T 1800 . In the released command line, -C selects the main-paper TACO configuration. 

TABLE XX COMPLETE DELTA FROM TACO TO THE FAST OVERLAY .              

> Setting TACO TACO -fast RF node/cone bound 10/16 9/14 RW cut keep count 250 100 Iterative stop no-improvement fixpoint fixpoint or gain <0.5%
> AIG yield window disabled 4096 evaluations MIG yield window disabled 3 rounds

The two engine bounds and the stopping threshold were selected on the development corpus. The yield windows follow the measured dry-block convention recorded in the artifact. 

21 The four online gates are listed in Table XXI. Each is a deterministic state machine scoped to one pass or one carrier lane. Their history-based triggers carry measured contracts, including the residual opportunities stated below. 

TABLE XXI EMPIRICAL GATES USED ONLY BY THE FAST OVERLAY .         

> Gate Trigger and action Registered residual F-P7 After a4096-evaluation block with zero committed gain, disable the dry RW, RS, or RF engine for the rest of the AIG pass. A later block may contain a commit. F-P8 After 4096 MFFC-1 evaluations with no RS/R2p candidate, dis-able RS on MFFC-1 roots for the rest of the AIG pass. At most a gain-1 Divs0/Quit candi-date per later root is at stake. F-P10 After three offer-free cut4 rounds, disable cut4 for the rest of that carrier lane. A later round may enter the cut4 fire region. F-P11 After three evaluated rounds with-out a win, disable the dry resub-stitution, refactoring, or balancing pass for the rest of that carrier lane. A later restructuring commit may be missed.

2) Orchestration results: Table XXII reports the fast over-lay under all four published Orchestration schedules. Ratios and speedups use the same inputs, host, harness, and published 

orchestrate command as Tables XVII and XVIII. In single-pass mode, the overlay moves the O16 depth and NDP ratios from 0.9681 /0.9581 to 0.9549 /0.9455 , while total time decreases from 16.5 s to 11.6 s. On U66 , NDP moves from 

0.9400 to 0.9344 and time from 37.8 s to 16.2 s. 

TABLE XXII 

> TACO

-FAST GEOMEAN RATIOS TO O R C H E S T R A T E UNDER THE FOUR PUBLISHED SCHEDULES . W INS COUNT STRICTLY SMALLER NODE COUNTS ; SECONDS ARE TOTALS ON THE COMMON HOST .                                                         

> Set Mode Nodes Levels NDP Wins sSpeedup
> O16 Single 0.9901 0.9549 0.9455 14/16 11.6 3.7×
> Iter. 1.0230 0.9630 0.9851 4/16 30.0 5.0×
> Resyn 1.0028 1.0403 1.0432 7/16 26.6 4.2×
> Resyn3 1.0056 1.0551 1.0610 7/16 37.3 3.9×
> U66 Single 0.9882 0.9455 0.9344 36/66 16.2 4.4×
> Iter. 1.0004 0.9524 0.9528 24/66 36.9 6.2×
> Resyn 0.9955 1.0009 0.9965 26/66 36.1 5.2×
> Resyn3 0.9926 1.0023 0.9950 25/66 50.9 4.7×

The node geomean remains within 0.04% of TACO ,while the corrected FlowTune/ITC inputs contribute several of the depth reductions. On the disjoint O16 \ D55 sub-set, TACO /TACO -fast respectively give 0.9897 /0.9908 nodes, 

0.9568 /0.9393 levels, and 0.9469 /0.9307 NDP, with 10/11 strict node wins in both configurations. The artifact retains the per-case nodes, levels, NDP, wall time, and engine-evaluation counts for every schedule. The output differences follow the registered empirical choices. On b18_1 in resyn mode, the fast overlay is better by 115 nodes; on s38417 , the base TACO configuration is better by 15 nodes. These cases establish that the online gates can move QoR in either direction even though the aggregate node ratios remain close. 

3) HeLO-comparison results: Table XXIII reports the two 

TACO -fast effort settings on the six available HeLO cases, preserving the input-fidelity groups of Table VII. At normal effort, its exact-input and all-context NDP geomeans are 0.940 

and 0.944 ; at maximum effort, they are 0.944 and 0.929 . For comparison, the main-paper TACO -max result in Table XII is 

0.903 /0.900 .The paired normal-effort diagnostic holds the AIG pre-pass fixed and switches only the MIG-side fast overlay. On fpu ,disabling that overlay produces 59,794 nodes at depth 20, whereas the fast run produces 65,408 nodes at the same depth. The trace attributes the 5,614-node difference to F-P11: it ends resubstitution three rounds early and forgoes two downstream depth-rewrite commits. The same trace supplies the concrete residual witness recorded for this empirical gate. 

4) Scope of the fast evidence: The tuned values were selected and evaluated on the development manifests, so the 

D55 and H6 results are in-sample performance evidence. The eleven corrected inputs in O16 \ D55 entered after the configuration freeze and form the disjoint evaluation subset reported above. The final untimed CEC sweep passes all 552 outputs from the main-paper and fast-overlay configurations. The evidence therefore covers functional equivalence, deter-ministic replay, measured QoR and runtime, and the late-opportunity residuals stated in Table XXI. 

U. Observed failure modes 

Three recurrent failures could promote a local observation into a false general claim: measuring the wrong call path, cit-ing a superseded lemma, or accepting unsupported generated text. Table XXIV pairs each observed instance with the control that now prevents its reuse as evidence. 

TABLE XXIV OBSERVED FAILURES AND THEIR CURRENT CONTROLS .                   

> Failure mode Observed instance Countermeasure Bug–artifact confusion Cut4 appeared sterile when a harness discarded its returned network Re-run through the deployed call path and check return-value own-ership Citation drift XMG was excluded us-ing agenuine but later-withdrawn lemma Status registry; only CURRENT entries may support a result Confabulation An LLM produced claims unsupported by the record Pinned source anchors, explicit obligations, and independent ad-versarial re-reading

V. The XMG correction, condensed 

A standalone harness reported no wins for the XMG lane on the 11-case set. A subsequent exclusion relied on a stale ledger claim that the XMG and MIG algebraic scripts were cost-equivalent on every AIG input. The registry had already withdrawn that claim: a seven-AND witness reaches (3 , 2) 

under the MIG script and (4 , 3) under the XMG script. The lane was restored; the incident motivated the status registry. Source re-reading localized the difference to an old-node structural-hash collision. Theorem 16 states the necessary condition for a first divergence: the preceding common state contains an adjacent node–parent pair sharing a fanin. Since 22 reassociation can create the pair, its absence at pass entry does not guarantee absence throughout the pass. P6 checks the boundary state before the XMG aggressive pass. Audit discarded its first implementation because of an uninitialized variable and an incomplete child-slot test. The rewritten check matches the collision shape; its place in the lane schedule remains a measured Tier-2 choice. The final 

H6 logs show zero trigger/outcome consistency violations, and s38417 reaches NDP 136,918 versus 137,173 with P6 disabled. The registry therefore retains P6 under its measured Tier-2 contract. 

W. Final-validation ledger 

Table XXV links each final quantitative or finite claim to the independent check that validates it. 

TABLE XXV CHECKS TIED DIRECTLY TO FINAL CLAIMS IN THIS PAPER .

Claim Evidence type Independent check Result 40 →31 exact cover Source proof/audit U-Q31 and its four dependen-cies over the legal implementa-tion domain PASS Stored 4-input NPN forms Exhaustive de-coder Two independent decoders; ev-ery driver canonicalizes to its claimed class 222/222 RS/RW/RF gain bounds Source proof/audit T8/T9 source obligations and adversarial audits PASS Gain-bound regres-sion Finite log scan No recorded violation in 

gain_scan.json 

66/66 Gate-only trajectory Differential output Byte comparison after normal-izing the embedded timestamp 66/66 iden-tical Optimizer correct-ness CEC Final untimed equivalence sweep over all released outputs 552/552 PASS 

The ledger separates three kinds of support. Source audits discharge universal proof obligations; finite decoders and scans discharge enumerable obligations; differential and CEC runs validate produced artifacts. Each supports only the correspond-ing type of claim. 

X. Representative refutations 

Table XXVI retains six consequential draft claims whose counterexamples materially changed the final theory or imple-mentation. 

TABLE XXVI DRAFT CLAIMS REFUTED DURING THIS CAMPAIGN .

Draft claim Counterexample or defect Final disposition Cut4 cone size ≤ 7 im-plies identity A two-record MAJ3 cone has stored size 1 and gain 1 Use E1–E5 accounting certificates NPN-minimal cone im-plies cut4 identity External hash sharing lowers the unreferenced replacement count Retain the dynamic count check First fiber witness has stored size 2 

maj(maj( x, y, z ), x, y )

absorbs to MAJ3 Replace by the verified three-gate polarity fiber H08 ≡ H10 Seven-AND witness: (3 , 2) versus 

(4 , 3) 

Keep both recipe actions H27 dominated by H39 Nine-gate witness reverses the pro-posed relation Keep both recipe actions Aggressive algebraic rewriting simulates selective Frozen-order family separates the two strategies Retain selective rewriting 

Inventory citation rule: Only claims marked current in the artifact support the results. Withdrawn and refuted claims remain as provenance and do not serve as premises. 

TABLE XXIII FAST -OVERLAY HELO RESULTS GROUPED BY INPUT FIDELITY . E NTRIES GIVE NODES , DEPTH , NDP ( IN 10 4 ), AND SECONDS ; PARENTHESIZED VALUES ARE RATIOS TO HELO’ S PUBLISHED VALUES .

HeLO [22] TACO -fast TACO -fast, maximum effort Case n d ndp s† n (ratio) d (ratio) ndp (ratio) s (ratio) n (ratio) d (ratio) ndp (ratio) s (ratio) 

Exact input artifacts: primary comparison 

aes core 21867 18 39.4 63 20084 (0.918) 19 (1.056) 38.2 (0.969) 1301 (20.7) 18367 (0.840) 21 (1.167) 38.6 (0.980) 1964 (31.2) i2c 1385 8 1.11 21 1317 (0.951) 8 (1.000) 1.05 (0.951) 2 (0.10) 1329 (0.960) 8 (1.000) 1.06 (0.960) 2 (0.09) mem ctrl 56592 61 345 337 66239 (1.170) 47 (0.770) 311 (0.902) 967 (2.87) 53275 (0.941) 58 (0.951) 309 (0.895) 899 (2.67) 

LSOracle-OPDB reconstructions: context 

chip bridge 58317 19 111 262 67935 (1.165) 16 (0.842) 109 (0.981) 96 (0.37) 67147 (1.151) 17 (0.895) 114 (1.030) 164 (0.63) fpu 68099 20 136 480 65408 (0.960) 20 (1.000) 131 (0.960) 300 (0.63) 59023 (0.867) 19 (0.950) 112 (0.823) 460 (0.96) 

Disclosed near variant: context 

s38417 9522 16 15.2 30 8069 (0.847) 17 (1.062) 13.7 (0.900) 27 (0.91) 8077 (0.848) 17 (1.062) 13.7 (0.901) 16 (0.54) Exact-input geomean 1.000 1.0074 0.9334 0.9403 1.7804 0.9121 1.0352 0.9442 1.9933 All-available context 1.000 0.9948 0.9484 0.9435 1.0296 0.9289 1.0003 0.9292 1.1523 

> †

HeLO seconds are reproduced from its paper and were measured on a different machine from ours. Their ratios provide cross-machine order-of-magnitude context; the Orchestration study above contains the same-machine speedups. 

23